NOTE: this document is not being worked on at the moment, instead the Nullability WG are currently exploring an alternative solution that addresses many of the same underlying issues in a different way: [Semantic Nullability RFC](SemanticNullability.md).

--- 

# RFC: Client Controlled Nullability

**Proposed by:**

- [Alex Reilly](https://github.com/twof) - Yelp iOS
- [Liz Jakubowski](https://github.com/lizjakubowski) - Yelp iOS
- [Mark Larah](https://github.com/magicmark) - Yelp Web
- Sanae Rosen - Yelp Android
- [Stephen Spalding](https://github.com/fotoetienne) - Netflix GraphQL Server Infrastructure
- [Wei Xue](https://github.com/xuewei8910) - Yelp iOS
- [Young Min Kim](https://github.com/aprilrd) - Netflix UI

This RFC proposes syntax that would allow developers to override schema-defined
nullability of fields for individual operations.

## Definitions

- **Required field** - A field which is marked with `!`.

## 📜 Problem Statement

In our experience, client developers have been frustrated that the vast majority of fields are
nullable. We’ve done this in accordance with official best practice, and we largely agree that this
is good practice. From the 
[official GraphQL best practice](https://graphql.org/learn/best-practices/#nullability):

> This is because there are many things that can go awry in a networked service backed by databases
and other
> services. A database could go down, an asynchronous action could fail, an exception could be
thrown. Beyond
> simply system failures, authorization can often be granular, where individual fields within 
a request can
> have different authorization rules.

The problem with the SDL Non-Nullable (`!`) is that it eliminates the possibility of partial failure
on a given type. This forces schema authors to decide for which fields partial failure is
acceptable. A GraphQL schema author may not be in the best position to predict whether partial failure
will be acceptable or unacceptable for every canvas that makes use of a field.

While the schema can have nullable fields for valid reasons (such as federation), in some cases the
client wants to decide if it accepts a `null` value for the result to simplify the client-side
logic.

## 🧑‍💻 Proposed Solution

A client-controlled Non-Nullable designator.

## 🎬 Behavior

Each client-controlled nullability designator overrides the schema-defined nullability of the field
it's attached to for the duration of the operation.

### `!`
The proposed client-controlled required designator would have identical semantics to the current 
schema-defined [Non-Null](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Executing-Selection-Sets.Errors-and-Non-Null-Fields).

## ✅ Validation

If a developer executed an operation with two fields name `foo`, one a `String` and the other an 
`Int`, the operation would be declared invalid by the server. The same is true if one of the fields
is designated required but both are otherwise the same type. In this example, `nickname` could be
either a `String` or a `String!` which are two different types and therefor can not be merged:

```graphql
fragment conflictingDifferingResponses on Pet {
  ... on Dog {
    nickname
  }
  ... on Cat {
    nickname!
  }
}
```

## ✏️ Proposed syntax

The client can express that a schema field is required by using the `!` syntax in the operation
definition:
```graphql
query GetBusinessName($id: String!) {
  business(id: $id)? {
    name!
  }
}
```

### `!`

We have chosen `!` because `!` is already being used in the GraphQL spec to indicate that a field in
the schema is Non-Nullable, so it will feel familiar to GraphQL developers.

## Use cases

### Improve the developer experience using GraphQL client code generators
Handling nullable values on the client is a major source of frustration for developers, especially
when using types generated by client code generators in strongly-typed languages. The proposed
required designator would allow GraphQL clients to generate types with more precise nullability 
requirements for a particular feature. For example, using a GraphQL client like Apollo GraphQL on 
mobile, the following query
```graphql
query GetBusinessName($id: String!) {
  business(id: $id)? {
    name!
  }
}
```
would be translated to the following type in Swift.
```swift
struct GetBusinessNameQuery {
  let id: String
  struct Data {
    let business: Business?
    struct Business {
      /// Lack of `?` indicates that `name` will never be `null`
      let name: String
    }
  }
}
```
If a null business name is not acceptable for the feature executing this query, this generated type
is more ergonomic to use since the developer does not need to unwrap the value each time it’s
accessed.

### 3rd-party GraphQL APIs
Marking a field Non-Nullable in schema is not possible in every use case. For example, when a
developer is using a 3rd-party API such as 
[Github's GraphQL API](https://docs.github.com/en/graphql) they won't be able to alter Github's
schema, but they may still want to have certain fields be required in their application. Even within
an organization, ownership rules may dictate that an developer is not allowed to alter a schema they
utilize.

## ✅ RFC Goals

- Non-nullable syntax that is based off of syntax that developers will already be familiar with
- Enable GraphQL client code generation tools to generate more ergonomic types

## 🚫 RFC Non-goals
This syntax consciously does not cover the following use cases:

- **Default Values**
  The syntax being used in this proposal causes queries to propagate an error in the case that
  a `null` is found for a required field. As an alternative, some languages provide syntax (eg `??` 
  for Swift) that says "if a field would be `null` return some other value instead". We have not 
  covered that behavior in this proposal, but leave it open to be covered by future proposals.

## 🗳️ Alternatives considered

### A `@nonNull` official directive

This solution offers the same benefits as the proposed solution. Additionally, this solution has 
good upgrade paths if we later want to provide more behavior options to developers. 
[Relay's `@required` directive](https://mrtnzlml.com/docs/relay/directives#required), for example, 
allows developers to decide how they want their clients to respond in the event that `null` is 
received for a `@required` field.

```graphql
fragment Foo on User {
  address @required(action: THROW) {
    city @required(action: LOG)
  }
}
```

With our current proposal, we don't have a great way to offer this kind of flexibility that would 
mesh nicely with existing GraphQL syntax.

However we think the described behavior acts as a nice, concise default, and is worth the tradeoff.

### A `@nonNull` custom directive

This is an alternative being used at some of the companies represented in this proposal.

While this solution simplifies some client-side logic, it does not meaningfully improve the 
developer experience for clients.

* The cache implementations of "smart" GraphQL clients also need to understand the custom directive 
  to behave correctly. Currently, when a client library caches a `null` field based on an operation 
  without a directive, it will return the `null` field for another operation with this directive.
* For clients that rely on client code generation, generated types typically cannot be customized 
  based on a custom directive. See 
  https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-code-generator/discussions/5676 for an example. As a result, 
  the optional generated properties still need to be unwrapped in the code.

This feels like a common enough need to call for a language feature. A single language feature would 
enable more unified public tooling around GraphQL.

### Make Schema Fields Non-Nullable

It is intuitive that one should simply mark fields that are not intended to be `null` Non-Nullable 
in the schema. For example, in the following GraphQL schema:

```graphql
type Business {
  name: String
  isStarred: Boolean
}
```

If we intend to always have a `name` and `isStarred` for a `Business`, it may be tempting to mark 
these fields Non-Nullable:

```graphql
type Business {
  name: String!
  isStarred: Boolean!
}
```

Marking schema fields Non-Nullable may introduce problems in a distributed environment where partial 
failure is a possibility regardless of whether the field is intended to have `null` as a valid 
state.

When a Non-Nullable field results in `null`, the GraphQL server will recursively step through the 
field’s ancestors to find the next nullable field. In the following GraphQL response:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "business": {
      "name": "The French Laundry",
      "isStarred": false
    }
  }
}
```

If `isStarred` is Non-Nullable but resolves to `null` and business is nullable, the result will be:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "business": null
  }
}
```

Even if `isStarred` resolves to a valid result, the response would no longer provide this data. If business is
Non-Nullable, the response will be:
```json
{
  "data": null
}
```

In the case that the service storing business stars is unavailable, the UI may want to go ahead and 
render the component without a star (effectively defaulting `isStarred` to `false`). A Non-Nullable 
field in the schema makes it impossible for the client to receive partial results from the server, 
and thus potentially forces the entire component to fail to render.

More discussion on [when to use Non-Nullable can be found here](https://medium.com/@calebmer/when-to-use-graphql-non-null-fields-4059337f6fc8)

Also see [3rd-party GraphQL APIs](#3rd-party-GraphQL-APIs) for an instance where it wouldn't be 
possible for a developer to alter the schema for a service they're using.

### Write wrapper types that null-check fields
This is the alternative being used at some of the companies represented in this proposal for the 
time being. It's labor intensive and rote work. It more or less undermines any gains from code 
generation.

### Alternatives to `!`
#### `!!`
This would follow the precedent set by Kotlin. It's more verbose and diverges from GraphQL's SDL
precedent.

## Decision Log

### `!` as the only designator in the RFC (July 2023)

At the July 26th meeting of the CCN sub-WG it was decided to simplify the RFC for the sake of progress. This 
reverses the "`?` as a counterpart to the `!`" designator.

The increased scope of the RFC with the nullability designator `?` has stalled the RFC for more than two 
years ([the initial RFC from April 2021](https://github.com/twof/graphql-spec/pull/1/files)).

One of the contentious discussions we encountered was around the proposed behaviors of the nullability designator 
`?`. Regardless of the chosen path, it had unintuitive semantics (see graphql/client-controlled-nullability-wg#2), 
which require other RFCs, such as [fragment boundaries](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/rfcs/FragmentModularity.md), or new ideas like inline errors.

Even though we recognize the value of having a counterpart to `!`, we made a tradeoff decision to provide value 
to the community sooner than later.

### Prior to July 2023

This proposal started out with a very simple premise and implementation, and has gotten more complex as 
the community has explored edge cases and facets about how GraphQL is actually used in practice. For 
example this proposal starts out by talking about accommodating the "best practices" that are recommended 
by the GraphQL documentation and the community, but we discovered pretty early on that there are 
legitimate use cases where the "best practices" are rightfully ignored. Some of those use cases are 
covered in "`?` as a counterpart to `!`". 

In order to cover instances like that, we've needed to justify additional complexity which can be 
difficult to understand for newcomers without (at this point a full year) of context. This decision
log was written with newcomers in mind to avoid rediscussing issues that have already been hashed out,
and to make it easier to understand why certain decisions have been made. At the time of writing, 
the decisions here aren't set in stone, so any future discussions can use this log as a starting point.

#### `?` as a counterpart to `!`

Lee was the first person [to suggest](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/867#issuecomment-840807186) 
that the inverse of `!` should exist and that it should be represented by `?`. The 
[reasoning](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/867#issuecomment-841372320) was that it "completes 
the story of control" and provides a guaranteed stopping point for `null` propagation if we're using the existing 
`null` propagation rules. The feeling was that "introducing ! without ? is like introducing `throw` without `catch`". 

Lee also surfaced that there are some use cases like his own at Robinhood where they're trying to balance 
developer experience and data preservation, and have opted to mark quite a few fields `Non-Null`. Data 
preservation is very important because Robinhood is working with financial data, so they have the opposite
problem where they sometimes want to be able to halt `null` propagation, rather than the inverse use case which 
this proposal originally supported.

Developers from Apollo indicated that many of their customers face problems around schema breaking where the 
solution to developer experience gripes is to make a breaking change and swap a field from nullable to `Non-Nullable`
or vice versa, which can be a labor intensive process.

Since there seemed to be general consensus that `?` was a good addition to the proposal, it was adopted without a vote.

Subsequently there was discussion around whether `?` could be introduced in a later proposal, and there was general 
agreement that the usability of `!` is limited without `?`, and the selected `null` propagation behavior described 
below solidifies the decision to introduce both additions in a single proposal.

#### List syntax

Developers from Apollo [suggested](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/895#issuecomment-961442966) early
on that users would want to apply CCN syntax to list elements. The possibility had been suggested earlier than 
that as well, but it was put off because neither Netflix nor Relay's CCN counterparts had the feature, and it 
hadn't been a problem yet. However there was enough interest during community feedback sessions to adopt it 
into the proposal. [Discussions](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/864) around which specific 
syntax to adopt happened over the following months.

Options other than the one that was landed on included the following:

```graphql
twoDimensionalList!!?
```
The folks that voted against this option felt that it was unclear how it should be interpreted, whether operators 
should be applied from the outside-in, or inside-out.

```graphql
twoDimensionalList as [[Int!]!]
twoDimensionalList <= [[Int!]!]
```
The folks that voted against this option felt that this option read like a type-cast, and that the inclusion 
of a type placed an undue burden on client developers. Validation would fail if the type was incorrect, and 
didn't provide much additional value.

```graphql
twoDimensionalList[[!]!]?
```
This syntax, called "the bracket syntax" during discussions was selected for adoption by majority vote at the 
[March 3rd, 2022 GraphQL Working Group Meeting](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2022/2022-03-03.md). 
9 out of 10 participants voted for this option with the final vote going to the `<= [[Int!]!]` option. 

Initially there was a restriction on the bracket syntax where the depth of the syntax needed to match depth of 
the field's list type, but participants at the same meeting felt that restriction should be loosened so 
that developers could opt to apply the syntax to only the field itself and ignore the elements of the 
list. Under that new rule the following would also be valid, and the two examples would be equivalent.

```graphql
twoDimensionalList!
twoDimensionalList[[]]!
```

There are however some open concerns that the first of the two examples could be ambiguous as to whether 
the `!` applies to the field as a whole or to the list elements.

#### `!` propagates `null` to nearest `?` rather than nearest nullable field

The selected mechanics were most requested by the folks at Meta working on [Relay](https://relay.dev/). 
Relay wanted this behavior for a few reasons
- Relay presents a facade of fragment isolation for its own 
[`@required` directive](https://relay.dev/docs/next/guides/required-directive/). If a field is `null`, 
rather than merging fragments and propagating `null` to all sibling fields on selection sets that use 
that fragment, the most popular option as chosen by ~90% of developers is to have the request throw 
and utilize React's error boundaries. It also has the option to do `null` propagation, but that too 
is bound to a single fragment. Because of this, it likely won't be able to use CCN at first, but 
developers would like to be able to use it in the future once 
[Fragment Modularity](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/rfcs/FragmentModularity.md) 
makes it into the spec. The selected option preserves the possibility of Relay and other clients that utilize 
fragments heavily using CCN in the future.
- The throwing option that Relay provides on their `@required` directive effectively allows developers 
to indicate "If some required field is missing, throw out everything from this field to the fragment boundary" 
which is tighter client control than was offered by the initial iteration of this proposal where `!` only 
transformed a field into a `Non-Null`. In that case, the server still had control over where `null` 
propagation halted with which fields the schema said were nullable. The selected `null` propagation option 
is slightly closer to the most popular `@required` option in that way. 

With the initial iteration of this proposal if users wanted to guarantee that all fields through multiple 
parents should be lost in the event that a child is `null`, they would need to mark each level with a `!`, 
but the selected option avoids that.

With the selected option, forgetting to include a `?` is potentially dangerous because it would result 
in more fields being lost than intended, all the way up to the `data` field in the worst case scenario. 
There were concerns that that was a blocker, but arguments were made that because most queries are relatively 
small, it wasn't actually that dangerous. Clients have also often been treating the existence of any errors 
as a failed request and thrown out entire responses, so in effect, clients been choosing the "worst case 
scenario" when given the option.

The behavior where `!` propagates `null` to nearest `?` was selected for adoption by majority vote at the 
[March 3rd, 2022 GraphQL Working Group Meeting](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2022/2022-03-03.md).
7 out of 8 participants voted for this option with the final vote going to behavior where the `!` would be non-destructive. 

The non-destructive option was turned down because having different behavior per-client wasn't desirable, and 
it provided no benefits to naive clients (like a bash script) because extra processing would be required 
for it to be a value-add.
