# GraphQL WG Notes - Mar 2023

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

# Primary meeting

## Agenda

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Lee)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Lee)
- Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
- Review agenda (2m, Lee)
- Review prior secondary meetings (5m, Lee)
  - [WG secondary APAC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/02-Feb/08-wg-secondary-apac.md)
  - [WG secondary EU](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/02-Feb/16-wg-secondary-eu.md)
- Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)
  - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- RFC "Root" operation types and schema definitions (15m, Lee)
  - [RFC spec text](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1015)
  - [GraphQL.js PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3846)
- Discuss GraphiQL v3 big features and request-for-help (10m, Jonathan)
- @graphiql/\* npm write access issues blocking releases since January (10m,
  Rikki)
- Default Value Validation Status Check (5m, Yaacov)
  - [Lee's original implementation PR stack at graphql-js](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3049)
  - [Now rebased on main](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3814)
  - [Benjie's Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793)
  - [Text for Changelog with emphasis on BREAKING CHANGES](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3814#issuecomment-1438334765)
- Defer & Stream (20m, Rob)
  - [Deduplication of deferred fields](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/65)
- GraphQL over HTTP Status Codes (10m, Michael)
  - [application/graphql-response+json](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/blob/main/spec/GraphQLOverHTTP.md#applicationgraphql-responsejson)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Hugh
- Benjie

## Review agenda (2m, Lee)

- Meta discussion: agenda says to be in alphabetical order but no-one does
  that…. Should we remove the prompt or try harder to do this?
  - Should reduce merge conflicts
  - Sort by first name (easier in editors)
  - Add alphabetical prompt in more places

## Review prior secondary meetings (5m, Lee)

- [WG secondary APAC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/02-Feb/08-wg-secondary-apac.md)
- [WG secondary EU](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/02-Feb/16-wg-secondary-eu.md)

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)

- [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- ACTION - everyone: we're going to garbage collect action items, so if there's
  any old ones that are still relevant please post a note in the thread!

## RFC "Root" operation types and schema definitions (15m, Lee)

- [RFC spec text](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1015)
- [GraphQL.js PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3846)
- Lee: Proposal is two things
  - Naming convention and clarity
  - Syntax change
- This is a follow up to Benjie's discussion around `schema {}` - indicating
  that a schema has no root types.
- We have a handful of cases where you can parse parts of the schema but they
  would not validate, and this is deliberate. This syntax would allow indicating
  this is deliberate - defining a schema that is temporarily not valid (has no
  root types).
- Then `extend schema { query: MyQueryType }`
- It's necessary because of our logic around picking up default named types.
  E.g. if you have a Mutation type that represents a virus mutating rather than
  a GraphQL mutation operation, we need that to NOT be detected as the root
  type.
- Michael: so `schema {}` is making sure that we _don't infer_ the default root
  types.
- Lee: exactly.
- Matt: makes sense, but it seems symmetric with allowing empty object/interface
  definitions.
- Lee [pharaphrased]: `type Foo` vs `extend type Foo { a: Int }` - the
  equivalent for this would be `schema` rather than `schema {}`
- Lee: We should make sure we apply this decision symmetrically.
- Ivan: I agree. I think GraphQL Java allows `type Foo {}` (with empty braces).
  Your argument Lee was that parser should catch empty braces indicating
  incorrectly empty types. This leads to parser ambiguity of type followed by a
  query (two documents: `type Foo` and `{ __typename }`, but combine and you get
  `type Foo { __typename }`). I'm up for reversing the decision and allowing
  `{}` on types. Empty types in the current syntax is very confusing for people.
  Apollo Rust engineers say this is a very confusing thing. Confusing syntax,
  and confusing difference between valid schema and partial schema when printing
  as SDL.
- Lee: I agree. I think this will turn out to be a (relatively small) can of
  worms - should we do this incrementally, or a holistic change?
- Matt: I'm pro incremental.
- Michael: PRs or spec releases?
- Lee: PRs
- Hugh: Thumbs up to PR.
- Benjie: if defined over multiple files, would you anticipate `schema {}` in
  each file, or a `extend schema {}` at the top of additional files so that they
  can simply be concatenated? I vote for allowing `extend schema {}` with
  nothing in the braces.
- Matt: we have sharded our schema for our tooling and that's exactly how I'd do
  it - `schema {}` on its own, and then `extend schema {} type Query {...}` in
  its own file. This would make the schema modularity/sharding easier to work
  with.
- Michael: more useful if each of the schema parts can stand on their own,
  otherwise you can just concatenate them.
- —
- Use the term "type" to refer to the GraphQL schema types. Use "kind" to refer
  to which variant of something (e.g. the operation variant:
  query/mutation/subscription).
- Confusing because we currently use "operation type" to refer to the root
  GraphQL operation object type, plus the kind of operation.
- Hugh: from an education point of view, people know there are three operation
  types, we don't want to have to reeducate there.
- Lee: concepts are the same, just using the word "kind" rather than "type" to
  avoid ambiguity.
- At the root we could be referring to the type (RootOperationTypeDefinition ->
  OperationTypeDefinition), or the "root field" or "root selection set".
- RootOperationTypeDefinition/OperationTypeDefinition and
  OperationType/OperationKind are very different concepts.
- Very early GraphQL implementations required that you had one root field that
  didn't even belong to a type, but now there is a type so we should use the
  term "root selection set".
- Benjie: I like the history here, thanks for the explanation; I am concerned
  about the similarity of the words type and kind; could we push to
  differentiate further to make this all more clear?
- Lee: goal is to differentiate, but also to be very clear about what they are.
  There's concepts that we use a bit sloppily but I'm trying to tease them
  apart.
  - An operation is defined by the kind it is
  - And it's defined by the type that the operation begins with
  - "root" kind of makes sense, but we're using it in an overlapping way
  - Also the operation type doesn't need to only be used at the root, it can be
    referenced elsewhere (e.g. on mutation payloads you might have
    `query: Query`)
- Lee: Please tear this apart and add a bunch of feedback!

## Discuss GraphiQL v3 big features and request-for-help (10m, Jonathan)

- [Postponed as Jonathan didn't make it]

## @graphiql/\* npm write access issues blocking releases since January (10m, Rikki)

- Rikki: we had to revoke my access in December. It's been restored except for
  to the `@graphiql/*` scope on NPM
- Rikki: it would also be nice to verify the VSCode plugin so that companies can
  sign off on it, we need DNS settings for that. A TXT record needs to be added
  to ensure that the VSCode marketplace organization account is associated with
  the graphql.org domain.
- Hugh: you'll want a catch-all email address set up for the VSCode extension
  because you'll get a load of emails through that.
- Rikki: yeah, there's a big plan for doing a lot of this, preparing for
  GraphiQL v3, Monaco, etc.
- Lee: you should have an invite now to the GraphiQL scope. Matt, Benjie you
  should also have invites.
- Lee: please send an email request into
  [operations@graphql.org](mailto:operations@graphql.org) for the DNS change as
  I don’t have access; GraphQL Foundation will help sort that out
- Benjie confirmed he has access to the @graphiql namespace in NPM now

## Default Value Validation Status Check (5m, Yaacov)

- [Lee's original implementation PR stack at graphql-js](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3049)
- [Now rebased on main](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3814)
- [Benjie's Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793)
- [Text for Changelog with emphasis on BREAKING CHANGES](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3814#issuecomment-1438334765)
- Skipping for now as Yaacov dropped from the call

## Defer & Stream (20m, Rob)

- [Deduplication of deferred fields](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/65)
- Rob: We've been meeting on this every week. As an overview:
- We're relatively in agreement that we've landed on merging all the defers
  under the same object together. That gives you the guarantee that for every
  `@defer` there's a corresponding path, only one `@defer` at each path.
- From there we've been discussing what happens to fields that are both in a
  defer and not.
- If we don't deduplicate then clients will expect data in both places and we
  can't change it later.
- Full deduplication is very hard - it could be dependent on the order of fields
  depending on what was delivered first, so you'd have to figure it out at
  runtime, hold on to more of the data at the executor, and remove things after
  the fact.
- We also considered statically transforming the query, but that's not something
  that the spec allows for currently because it goes down recursively object by
  object.
- I don't think full or partial deduplication can be done in the spec without
  looking ahead at fields before they're executed.
- Ivan and Benjie had proposals that change some of these constraints. Clients
  might receive payloads that aren't immediately actionable, but would mean that
  the same data doesn't need to be sent more than once.
- Our model right now is that when you hit a defer you're branching execution.
  If you execute the resolver both inside and outside the defer, you might get
  different results. If you're also deduplicating then this could be a fatal
  issue - getting a different result for two different calls of the resolver
  could give you data that doesn't match up with what was sent before.
- So if we're doing deduplication we need to make sure that we're not calling
  the resolvers twice. Implementing that without changing the constraints that
  we have is hard. Either you'd have to do as Benjie proposes and send data to
  the client before the rest of the fields are completed, or you'd have to use
  some kind of cache. Using a WeakMap in JS is one option, but that construct
  doesn't necessarily map to other languages.
- So Keweiqu's challenge is the main problem.
- Lee: on the caching thing we already have a handful of cases where if you
  query the same field multiple times it's reasonable to expect that you might
  get different results each time - clients typically either use aliases or will
  accept only the latest value.
- Ivan: we've discussed a lot of these solutions, so maybe we should formulate
  the question as: is it a requirement that the same path should provide the
  same value? If we recognize this as a requirement, it can help shape the
  solution.
- Ivan: having multiple copies is one question, but is it okay to have different
  values at the same path? I think no, but I'm interested in hearing what other
  people say.
- Michael: the problematic thing is that we've ruled out rewriting the query.
- Benjie: I don’t think we can solve this with query rewriting, after thinking
  about it further; we would need the entire tree to be present, which we won’t
  have, limiting the rewriting
- Benjie: 2 ways of interpreting this; 1) taking the entire data you would had
  and send it through in patches, which we would expect every path in it to be a
  different value; 2) …
- Lee: let’s be careful about describing things as firm requirements here
- Yaacov: for a client using a normalized cache, even at different paths,
  different selection sets could end up merging the same object with the same ID
  and overwriting with the new data. You could get a mixture of results - it's a
  tricky problem. Incremental delivery makes things worse, but it's not
  necessarily a new problem. Deduplication makes this worse. You can't assume
  that the object delivered last in incremental delivery is the latest, it could
  be that subfields delayed it.
- Matt: defer/stream is hitting its head against this over and over; we're
  prototyping server behavior and server idioms really well; what we're missing
  is spec or canonical client implementations. The reference client
  implementation is just the JSON responses. No-one is expecting product teams
  to be interacting directly with the incremental payload.
- Yaacov: if we release experimentally GraphQL v17 with a couple different
  behaviors via arguments and let clients experiment we might get some feedback.
- Lee: I support that experimentation.
- Matt: I'd argue for a spec client in GraphQL-js.
- Michael: servers are all very similar, but clients work completely different
  ways. There can't really be a spec client.
- Rikki [chat]: GraphiQL liked this
- Lee: I agree GraphiQL is one of the simple clients but widely used
- Hugh: they're not expecting to see all the internal data that streams through,
  just the final payload.
- Lee: for those tools I hope they evolve to show the raw payloads, have a
  scrubber/etc to engage with it being incremental. I don't really think there's
  a dumb client for GraphQL, but we should make sure that the floor for this
  should be very low. I like "at this path, merge this data" - you should be
  able to write a client that supports incremental delivery in 100 lines of code
  or less.
- Ivan: GraphiQL doesn't care about fragments/fragment modularity. Makes sense
  to have a flag in GraphiQL to see the whole merged response versus the
  individual payloads.
- It's impossible to do this if you have different values at different paths.
- Benjie [chat]: For me, it's essential that there MUST be a "final shape"
  that's non-ambiguous and is equivalent to you having issued the query without
  any @stream/@defer.
- Hugh: Agree with Benjie's comment
- Lee: Fields get executed in a somewhat well defined order. There is a sense of
  time passing; the goal here should be that you end up with one big lump at the
  end even if it's delivered in lots of small lumps. We need to try and keep the
  solution simple otherwise people won't understand/trust it.
- Hugh: can we nail down the constraints/requirements?
- Benjie [chat]:
  - Constraint 1: I don't care about this.
  - Constraint 2: I don't care about this.
  - Constraint 3: I don't care about this.
  - Requirement 1: essential, but can require `foo: __typename`, doesn't have to
    be inherent to @stream/@defer.
  - Requirement 2: essential.
  - NEW Requirement 3: you must be able to represent the final result of
    stream/defer as a final object in the same way as if you were to strip all
    the @defer/@stream. (This is poorly worded, sorry.)

## GraphQL over HTTP Status Codes (10m, Michael)

- [application/graphql-response+json](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/blob/main/spec/GraphQLOverHTTP.md#applicationgraphql-responsejson)
- [Postponed to next meeting due to lack of time]

# Secondary (EU)

## express-graphql:

- Scan over PRs to see if there are any critical fixes, if so push out a new release
- Deprecate all versions on npm in favour of graphql-http
- Close all issues and PRs
- Archive repository
- Don't lock npm module (if possible) because still too many users
