# GraphQL WG Notes - September 2023

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

# Primary

Agenda:
[https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/10-Oct/05-wg-primary.md](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2023/10-Oct/05-wg-primary.md)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie

## Review prior secondary meetings (5m, Lee)

- Previous meetings were skipped due to the conference.

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)

- [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- ACTION - Benjie: close all action items that haven't received activity in 6
  months.
- Lack of keyword implies this is a query, but we are talking about a selection
  set.
- Lee: It's implied that the top is the mutation.
- Benjie: line 399, “given the following operations”
- Lee: intent is to show the full operation. That’s why this is perceived as
  confusing. Roman’s suggestion is correct but incorrect.
- Lee: okay with this being an incremental thing, and take a partial fix from
  Roman. But we need follow ups.
- Benjie: not 100% sure this is the right solution :). Specifically talking
  about executing a selection…..
- ACTION: firm up the wording, e.g. replace "selection set" with "operation" or
  similar.

## Client Controlled Nullability and True Nullability Schema (30m, Jordan/Benjie)

- [True Nullability Schema](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1394)
- [Null-Only-On-Error type (asterisk) RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1048)
- Jordan: Product code will do null coalescing and other tricks to deal with
  nullable-by-default, or will just get issues.
- CCN gives a solution to this to make it easier to work with; but there's a
  fundamental issue: these assertions are made "blindly". They can't see if a
  field is _expected_ to be null normally, or if it's an exceptional case where
  it's expected to be null, and it will only be null on error.
- Q: Why do we coerce errors to null?
- A: We want the client-server relationship to say that the "data" portion is
  type-safe with respect to the schema - so you know which fields will be there
  and which will not. Then we get an issue where a field wants to be null
  because of an error, but the schema says it cannot be null, so we propagate
  the null to the next level.
- As we explored this with Relay, we realized that it's not type-safe data, and
  some "metadata" in the errors object; but actually it's a tree where each
  value is there, null, or an error. Errors are only separate as an encoding
  issue.
- Lee: Agree. Also: forwards compatibility - we want schema changes to be able
  to be made without breaking older clients. You can always return a subset of
  the values from a field; but never a super set - never new unexpected values.
  Nullability is this shape of problem - a union of the thing you can get with
  null. This is why GraphQL does this the opposite way around to most
  programming languages - it's never safe to make an output nullable, but it's
  always safe to make it non-nullable - therefore non-null, adding the `!`, is
  the safe behavior.
- Most schema designers follow the defaults, and the default is nullable to make
  sure that these changes can be made later.
- Jordan: Now let's think about "error handling clients". These clients aren't
  comfortable rendering partial data. Adding Relay to the Ads manager product at
  Facebook and the coercion story is not comfortable; and we're not alone - we
  only want to see null when it's really truly null. Relay is exploring error
  handling approaches. It's common to throw away entire responses if any errors
  exist. This is the default state for Apollo Client too.
- Relay wants to be an error handling client that will never render a null
  that's actually an error, but will contain that in some way. Imagine reading a
  field on the client is like lazily evaluating the field on the server - and
  that might throw. So it's like propagating the error from the server until you
  read it on the client, and then using the client's own error handling
  mechanisms for that read.
- This class of clients are doing a lot of work to handle nulls that are never
  expected to be null; we could be handling that.
- Desire: communicate to the clients the "true" nullability of these fields.
  When they meet a true null, they will then know that the value being null is a
  normal part of operation, not an exceptional case.
- Two missing pieces:
  1. A mechanism for error-handling clients to see the "true nullability" of the
     schema, whilst allowing non-error-handling clients to see the expectations
     that they see today. Sharing the same server, same schema potentially.
  2. Resilient error-handling clients would like to opt-out of null bubbling
     (and error coercion generally). Give me any data, just tell me it's an
     error.
- Lee: Why don't we have the metadata today to accept the garbage and use the
  errors metadata to determine the null is an error.
- Jordan: the client can know that; but at type generation time an
  error-handling client wants to give a non-nullable type if it will only be
  null on error.
- Stephen: Result&lt;Option&lt;T>> can become Result&lt;T> if we know it's just
  the value or an error.
- Lee: historical validation of this: classic failure mode was before
  client-side type generation got good, we had Obj-C and Java generating
  mediocre types and not thinking hard about nulls, and the Java clients often
  assumed that nulls weren't possible, which was generally true but not always -
  and then all the clients would NPE. We had to handle this in all the clients
  at Facebook.
- Benjie: what we need is what Jordan described as true nullability from the
  server (source of truth). This will help out greatly with different peoples’
  asks. Some people want exceptions, others want default behavior.
- Benjie: expressing true nullability “nonnull”, “nonOnlyOnError” mutually
  exclusive.
  - https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1048/files
- Lee: What's the new semantic information that’s communicated by schema
  developer? Does the combination of the two for client developers seem great or
  complicated?
- Michael: The client can switch null bubbling off is the value prop of this
  proposal. So unclear how the marking here provides value to the consumer.
- Benjie: the client still needs to make decisions of every single null they can
  potentially encounter. The \* indicate it will only be null in the exception
  case. So for a true null-handling client you can know this thing will have a
  non-null value, otherwise it will be thrown.
- Michael: Any field could throw error, what’s the benefit of having “_”.
  Unclear about the decision the client can make with the “_”
- Jordan: The need for the 3rd state is for bridging the stage of existing
  clients and the client can handle the null/error/nonnull union types. The
  middle state will be interpreted differently during the client codegen stage.
- Martin: @catch?? The actual control? The middle type shouldn’t be too
  concerned with the codegen?
- Jordan: if I’m a codegen client, and the field is in the middle state, then I
  will handle it differently. But I can give you a safe non-null type. Existing
  client is not a error handling client.
- Lee: What do we want the default to be? Nonnull modifiers have the effect of
  creating a different way to create an error bubble. When we introduce “_” is
  that going to be everywhere, or do we want to advise it to use sparsely. ? is
  either null, or value. Default is the “ambiguous” field. ‘?’ makes it clear
  that this field is indeed semantically null. “_” resolves the ambiguity.
- Benjie: every single SDL that currently exists, if they wanna introduce this,
  all these files need to be all modified.
- Lee: If this proposal is also where you (Benjie) started, I think there is
  something there, that I think worth figuring out.
- Stephen: for backend developer who knows nothing about GraphQL “\*” will be
  confusing and “?” is much more intuitive.

## Full Schemas (15min, Martin)

- [Terminology + Appendix C: built-in definitions](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1391)
- [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1049](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/1049)
- Related topic. Full schema idea: in Apollo Kotlin we need to be able to
  validate an arbitrary operation, and we can't do that without knowing which
  introspection features the schema supports.
- Ideally there'd be an artifact that can be produced by the server and consumed
  by the client that includes the "full schema" definition.
- Source schema document: what we do today, brevity important, written by
  humans, no-built in types (boring; might conflict)
  - `type Query {a: Int}` &lt; Valid source schema
- Full schema document: exhaustive; contains _all_ of the built in types,
  written by machines, much more verbose. Can be used to determine if the schema
  opts out of null bubbling or other such things.
- Currently doesn't contain meta-fields: `__type`, `__schema` and `__typename`.
  `__typename` especially is really verbose.
- There may be unused types in the document - e.g. if `ID` is not used anywhere
  it may still exist in the full schema document
- Apollo Kotlin users often do an introspection query and convert to GraphQL to
  store into source control; they're already doing this.
