# GraphQL WG Meeting #2

To attend this meeting, edit this page to add your name to the list of attendees
and include any additions to the Agenda below.

- **Video Conference Link**: https://bluejeans.com/419299417/
- **Live Notes**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1utlAEQBn9Ws7GfYESZiyCubL-S61tcm2SzlFD4dSIBg/edit?usp=sharing
- **Date**: October 27th 2017
- **Time**: 9:00AM - 12:00PM PST

## Physical Locations

We've booked a large room at Facebook HQ in Building 23 for this meeting, and
can host lunch afterwards. If you plan to join at this location, please
reach out to the contact *before* showing up so they know to expect you and to
receive logistics. Plan to arrive at least 10 minutes before the meeting begins.

- Facebook, Menlo Park, CA
  - **Location**:
    1 Facebook Way, Building 23
    Menlo Park, CA, 94025
  - **Contact**: Lee Byron \<leebyron@fb.com>
- Apollo HQ, San Francisco, CA
  - **Location**:
    140 10th Street
    San Francisco, CA, 94103
  - **Contact**: Sashko Stubailo \<sashko@apollodata.com>

## Attendees

Name                | Organization  | Location
------------------- | ------------- | -----------------
Lee Byron           | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Greg Hurrell        | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Syrus Akbary        | Graphene      | San Francisco, CA
Hyo Jeong           | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Ivan Goncharov      | APIs.guru     | Menlo Park, CA
Roman Hotsiy        | APIs.guru     | Menlo Park, CA
Johannes Schickling | Graphcool     |
Søren B. Schmidt    | Graphcool     |
Brad Baker          | Atlassian, graphql-java | Sydney, Australia, (3am yikes)
Andi Marek          | Atlassian, graphql-java | Sydney, Australia
Oleg Ilyenko        | Sangria       | Berlin, Germany
Dan Schafer         | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Sashko Stubailo     | Apollo        | San Francisco, CA
James Baxley*       | Apollo        | San Francisco, CA
Martijn Walraven    | Apollo        | San Francisco, CA
William Lyon        | Neo4j         | San Mateo, CA
Michael Hunger      | Neo4j         | Dresden, Germany

<small>\*: willing to take notes (eg. <em>Joe Montana*</em>)</small>

## Agenda

1. Opening of the meeting
1. Introduction of attendees
1. Review agenda (5m)
1. Determine volunteers for note taking (5m)
1. Review current Draft for ["Stages for changes to the GraphQL Specification"](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) ([original PR](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/342)) (10m).
1. Discuss status of IDL specification (10m)
1. Status of [Scalar serialize as built-in scalar type](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/326) RFC (10m)
1. Discuss interest in and possible scope of defining a more structured format for errors (15m)
1. Update on community projects around schema stitching (15m)
1. Namespacing discussion
1. Discuss next steps for ["Standardizing unique IDs in the spec/tooling"](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/232) (20m)
1. "GraphQL over HTTP" specification (20m)
1. Discuss upcoming meeting schedule (5m)

## Agenda and Attendee guidelines

- To cover everything, discussion will be time-constrained per topic.
- Topics that require less discussion should be covered first.
- To respect meeting size, attendees should be relevant to the agenda.
- Read the [participation guidelines](../README.md#participation-guidelines).
