# GraphQL WG Meeting #3

To attend this meeting, edit this page to add your name to the list of attendees
and include any additions to the Agenda below.

- **Video Conference Link**: https://bluejeans.com/336583652
- **Live Notes**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Hq4Mh9R1yTRuX0Z_tuKxNsRP-sCBrWlREs9fl06GuQQ/edit?usp=sharing
- **Date**: February 1st 2018
- **Time**: 9:00AM - 12:00PM PST

## Physical Locations

We've booked a large room at Facebook HQ in Building 23 for this meeting, and
can host lunch afterwards. If you plan to join at this location, please
reach out to the contact *before* showing up so they know to expect you and to
receive logistics. Plan to arrive at least 10 minutes before the meeting begins.

- Facebook, Menlo Park, CA
  - **Location**:
    1 Facebook Way, Building 23
    Menlo Park, CA, 94025
  - **Contact**: Lee Byron \<leebyron@fb.com>

## Attendees

Name                 | Organization  | Location
-------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------
Lee Byron            | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Ivan Goncharov       | APIs.guru     | Lviv, Ukraine
Johannes Schickling  | Graphcool     | San Francisco, CA
Søren Bramer Schmidt | Graphcool     | San Francisco, CA
Marc Giroux          | GitHub        | Montreal, Canada
Oleg Ilyenko         | Sangria       | Berlin, Germany
Kim Brandwijk        | Supergraphql  | The Netherlands
Orta Therox *        | Artsy         | New York City, NY
Alan Johnson *       | Artsy         | New York, NY
Mike Marcacci        | Boltline      | San Diego, CA
Syrus Akbary         | Graphene      | San Francisco, CA
James Baxley         | Apollo        | Anderson, SC
Martijn Walraven     | Apollo        | Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Sashko Stubailo      | Apollo        | San Francisco, CA

<small>\*: willing to take notes (eg. <em>Joe Montana*</em>)</small>

## Agenda

1. Opening of the meeting
1. Introduction of attendees
1. Review agenda (5m)
1. Determine volunteers for note taking (5m)
1. Discuss upcoming meeting schedule (5m)
1. Share status of Schema Definition Language & Next spec version (10m)
1. Present [graphql-import](https://github.com/graphcool/graphql-import) (5m)
1. Next steps for ["GraphQL over HTTP" spec](https://github.com/APIs-guru/graphql-over-http) (15m)
1. [SDL syntax for custom scalars](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/326#issuecomment-347948670) (15m)
1. Discuss subscriptions for live queries (15m)
1. Discuss moving connection/global ID specs from Relay into best practices repo (15m)
1. Exposing schema metadata (30m)
1. Discuss errors (30m)
1. Discuss interface hierarchies (30m) [RFC](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/373), [POC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/1218)

## Agenda and Attendee guidelines

- To cover everything, discussion will be time-constrained per topic.
- Topics that require less discussion should be covered first.
- To respect meeting size, attendees should be relevant to the agenda.
- Read the [participation guidelines](../README.md#participation-guidelines).
