# GraphQL WG – June 2019

The GraphQL Working Group meets monthly to discuss proposed additions to the
[GraphQL Specification](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec) and other
relevant topics to core GraphQL projects. Anyone in the public GraphQL
community may attend, provided they first sign the [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation) or belong to an organization who has signed.

- **Video Conference Link**: TBD
- **Live Notes**: TBD
- **Date & Time**: [June 6th 2019 16:00 - 19:00 UTC](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/meetingdetails.html?year=2019&month=6&day=6&hour=16&min=0&sec=0&p1=224&p2=179&p3=136&p4=37&p5=239&p6=101&p7=152)

<small>*NOTE:* Meeting date and time may change up to a week before the meeting.
Please check the agenda the week of the meeting to confirm.</small>


## Agenda and Attendee Guidelines

*To attend this meeting or propose a topic*, edit this page and add your name
to the list of attendees below along with your organization and location. Add any agenda item you wish to discuss, please include relevant links.

- Each attendee (or attendee's organization) must sign the [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation).
- Read the [participation guidelines](../README.md#participation-guidelines).
- To cover everything, discussion may be time-constrained per topic.
- Topics that require less discussion should be covered first.
- To respect meeting size, attendees should be relevant to the agenda.


## Attendees

Name                 | Organization       | Location
-------------------- | ------------------ | ----------------------
Lee Byron            | GraphQL Foundation | Menlo Park, CA
Cory Monty           | Braintree          | Chicago, IL
Tanay Pratap         | Microsoft          | Bengaluru, India
Evan Huus            | Shopify            | Ottawa, Canada
Devon Blandin*       | Artsy              | New York, NY
Luke Korth           | Braintree          | Columbus, OH
Bruno Scheufler\*    | GraphCMS           | Berlin, DE
Rikki Schulte        | Ind. Contributor   | Cleveland, OH
Benjie Gillam        | PostGraphile       | Southampton, UK
Yash Handa           | Individual Contrib | Delhi, IN
Michael Staib        | ChilliCream        | Zurich, Switzerland
Rafael Staib         | ChilliCream        | Zurich, Switzerland
Seth Newberry        | Linux Foundation   | San Diego, CA
Alec Aivazis         | Ind. Contributor   | Los Angeles, CA
Pavel Chertorogov    | Ind. Contributor   | Almaty, Kazakhstan
James Baxley         | Apollo             | Greenville, SC
Craig Smitham        | GraphZen           | Dallas, TX

<small>\*: willing to take notes (eg. Joe Montana\*)</small>


## Agenda

1. Opening of the meeting
1. Introduction of attendees
1. Review agenda (5m)
1. Determine volunteers for note taking (5m)
1. GraphiQL WG update (Benjie, Rikki) (15m)
1. Dynamic variable declaration [proposal](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/583) (30m)
1. *ADD YOUR AGENDA ITEM ABOVE HERE*
