# GraphQL WG Notes - August 2022

**Watch the replay:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

## Agenda

1. Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
   Code of Conduct (1m, Lee)
   - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
   - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
   - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
   - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
2. Introduction of attendees (5m, Lee)
3. Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
4. Review agenda (2m, Lee)
5. Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)
   - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
   - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
   - [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
6. Updates to meeting times & cadence (5m, Lee)
   - [Discussion thread](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1051)
7. GraphQL-over-HTTP Spec update (5m, Benjie)
   - Specification:
     [https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/draft/](https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/draft/)
   - Raised to Stage 1 in latest subcommittee meeting; aim: stage 2
   - Reference implementation in JavaScript:
     [https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-http](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-http)
8. Parsing Stress Testing Project
   - A set GraphQL Documents which fully express the GraphQL spec for purposes
     of stress testing parser implementations.
   - [GH Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/954)
9. Structured, Type-safe, Returnable and Union-Capable Type; and more meaty
   metadata musings (20m, Benjie)
   - [S.T.R.U.C.T. RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/1035)
   - [Struct-based metadata RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/1036)
10. Allow Unions to Include Abstract Types (10m, Yaacov)
    - [Motivation](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/711)
    - [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/950)
    - [Implementation PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3682)
11. GraphQL definition, SDL Role (20m, @rivantsov)
    - [Formal GraphQL Definition](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1017)
    - [SDL File, its role and purpose in GraphQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1019)
12. Specifying 'extensions' property on requests (10m, Benjie)
    - [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/976)
13. GraphQL spec
    [Chapters 2,3 - reorder and change titles #1018](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1018)
    , (10m, @rivantsov)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie
- Tim

## Review agenda (2m, Lee)

- Roman: people added topics above mine
- Lee: Generally shorter topics get discussed sooner, longer topics at the end
  of the meeting
- Benjie: also GitHub's resolution of merge conflicts often means that later PRs
  end up above earlier ones (?!)

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)

- [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- Action of opening the issues has been completed ✅

## Updates to meeting times & cadence (5m, Lee)

- [Discussion thread](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1051)
- [Proposal](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1051#discussioncomment-3327561)
- Lee: used to be a 3 hour long meeting. Grueling. This made it challenging for
  people where the third hour was really late. We also desire an
  asia-pacific-compatible meeting time. We've been doing this for about a year,
  and I feel like we failed on both marks - Europeans still seem to be coming,
  but it's late; Asian attendance has not improved. 5-6am become 3-4am due to
  DST.
- We've been overflowing and losing items, and progress has been faster than the
  meetings.
- Alex suggested increasing the cadence; and that seems to be what most people
  preferred, so I have a proposal:
  - Move to Wednesdays
  - Weekly meetings
    1. west coast US mornings (early for west coast and Europe)
       1. Even-numbered ISO-weeks:
          [Wednesdays @ 9:30am - 11am PT](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Example+US%2FEU+GraphQL+WG&iso=20220810T0930&p1=224&ah=1&am=30)
          1. 12:30pm for NYC, 5:30pm London, 6:30pm Zurich
    2. west coast US evenings (suitable for asia-pacific, less so for Europe) 2.
       Odd-numbered ISO-weeks:
       [Wednesdays @ 3:30pm - 5pm PT](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Example+US%2FEU+GraphQL+WG&iso=20220817T1530&p1=224&ah=1&am=30) 2.
       6:30pm for NYC, 8:30am for Sydney
- Michael: This should work better for GraphQL-Java in Australia.
- Hugh: Improving inclusivity - great.
- Roman: can we do 8 hour intervals?
- Hugh: we need to be sensitive to the chair's time
- Lee: indeed, I tried to make it so that I can attend all meetings
- Benjie: Wednesdays generally busy for me, Thursdays better
- Lee: indeed, we don't need to move to Wednesdays. Possible conflict with the
  GraphQL Foundation meeting
- &lt;Someone>: also the Composite Schemas WG
- Matt: what does it mean for the TSC. Maybe only one in a while is the official
  one?
- Lee: good flag; I'll take a look.
- Lee: we'll probably stay on Thursdays, do the time shift. I'll check it
  doesn't clash with other meetings, do some calendaring.
- Benjie: this takes us from 2h a month to 6h a month. If we keep the meetings
  to about 1h, we have 30min buffer, which can turn out nicely
- Michael: How do we manage the agenda? A stop-gap that we cut off at 1h and say
  it has to be merged for the next meeting?
- Lee: yeah, that mostly works punting it to the next meeting. Flag if meeting
  is getting too heavy.
- Roman: 6 hours instead of two - hopefully enough!

## GraphQL-over-HTTP Spec update (5m, Benjie)

- Specification:
  [https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/draft/](https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/draft/)
- Raised to Stage 1 in latest subcommittee meeting; aim: stage 2
- Reference implementation in JavaScript:
  [https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-http](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-http)
- Benjie: Made edits to the spec. Raised to stage 1. Would like to get the main
  WG approval.
- Expecting this to not break any service from the MUST perspective. Maybe some
  SHOULDs are not there yet. Apollo Server decided to not support all SHOULDs,
  which is fine
- Ivan: We have `application/graphql` as response, although I suggested it
  originally as a mime type. Can be discussed async.
- Michael: There was a reason for that. We can’t just introduce a new mime type.
- Ivan: Rather with a different name, `application/graphql-response`
- Lee: Thank you for the update. As it’s a companion spec, it doesn’t
  necessarily have to go through these stages. But there is a discoverability
  problem we need to solve. Would be great to get it hosted under
  spec.graphql.org
- Benjie: That was one of the main questions: Should the WG need to be involved
  or is it entirely decided by the subcommittee?
- Lee: I like a model where a subcommittee owns it. Nothing yet abites to the
  spec, but a bunch of members of the subcommittee can then implement it. Once
  people implement it and we see gaps in implementation, we can add more
  formality. Giving updates to the larger group instead of asking for decisions
  to be made is probably the better model.
- Michael: If things are marked as “done”, who should decide? The TSC?
- Lee: Have to check legal, but everyone involved needs to accept CLA. Important
  point for now: Make sure CLA is in place.
- Hugh: Does this mean express-graphql is becoming the reference implementation
  for this spec?
- Michael: Denis (enisdenjo), who specified the graphql-ws protocol now writes
  the reference implementation. Apart from that not yet defined.
- Hugh: As express-graphql is under the foundation, that seems to be the place
  to go
- Benjie: Yes, if there’s a reference implementation, express-graphql should be
  the one. Will get interesting once we go for events, websockets, as
  express-graphql doesn’t support that yet
- Lee: Probably the right thing to have the reference implementation under the
  foundation
- Gabriel: you said references should be owned by WG; would it be correct to say
  it's a requirement (for all sub-specs)?
- Lee: I think that's fairly safe. I want to avoid pointing to another repo as a
  reference implementation and then the repo goes away for some reason. It also
  helps from a legal/IP perspective.
- Lee: we have playbooks to allow the folks who have done the bulk of the work
  to maintain maintainership over them.

## Parsing Stress Testing Project

- A set GraphQL Documents which fully express the GraphQL spec for purposes of
  stress testing parser implementations.
- [GH Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/954)
- [Solomon wasn't able to make it, item skipped until next month]

## Structured, Type-safe, Returnable and Union-Capable Type; and more meaty metadata musings (20m, Benjie)

- [S.T.R.U.C.T. RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/1035)
- [Struct-based metadata RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/1036)
- Benjie: Did a talk about metadata at GraphQL Conf. Looked into different
  solutions. One problem coming back to was that introspection giving outputs.
- Talked about it with Ivan. Expanded on oneOf.
- Maybe this is something.
- Input objects have fields, which can be types.
- Can be referenced in a chain, but not infinite
- What if we take such a type and export it?
- We got the ofType, ofType, … 8 layers deep in introspection
- Past a certain level we can’t introspect with GraphiQL anymore
- This can happen with people’s schemas
- Example: Table of content, which you don’t want to finish. You don’t want the
  application to break then.
- Some people used JSON, but that breaks types.
- You can also represent a tree as a list, but that’s not aligned with GraphQL
  goals of being easily accessible.
- Another request: Wildcard selection. We don’t have it, as it wouldn’t allow
  adding new fields -> Would break old clients
- Especially for deep object trees or things that might be deprecated
- If there’s something with structure which you want to treat as a scalar,
  that’s the use-case here
- Example: GIS. They have polygons, coordinates, properties etc.
- When you pull a geojson node, you want the whole thing **and** get all the
  properties of that one node in a typesafe way.
- One thing it might solve: Polymorphism.
- Related to input unions: Adding \_\_typename to input objects. But we decided
  to not go that route.
- If we’d add structs for input & output, we got symmetry, which makes it more
  desirable.
- Experimented with replacing scalar, input object or have a new concept of
  STRUCTs
- Input objects would become structs
- What else we could do: If you think of a scalar like a JSON scalar, you
  request it. For atomic pieces of data, you want to pull the whole thing.
- Sometimes you want a sub-selection.
- New suggestion: Accept optional selection sets.
- Selection sets here however wouldn’t have arguments, therefore no alias.
- Merging therefore gets easy.
- Particularly interesting for metadata and geo json
- Here’s the interesting idea
- What are your thoughts?
- Lee: We talked about something similar when talking about input unions.
  Essentially struct or oneOf. For due diligence, we followed down the struct
  path. However, it broke backward compatibility.
- Benjie: Don’t remember specific concerns. Think that we can avoid most of
  them. One was do we need \_\_typename or not. Wouldn’t be required unless you
  use it with an input union. Most things should be fine.
- Ivan: Can give context. The type would become a frozen type. Any non-nullable
  field means it’s required to provide it. For geo coordinates, Ukraine has
  their own local system. Ukrainian coordinates are non-nullable, as you can
  always convert. You can do unions of stuff. But can’t add non-nullable
  anymore.
- Matt: You could enable migration, if input and output structs would be
  different. If structs are structural, any struct that is a superset of the
  input struct can be passed in. On the other hand, a subset of the output could
  also work.
- Ivan: If we have two different types, it would defeat the purpose of
  splitting. Can’t split it anymore.
- Roman: Comment on aliases not needed. Alias would still be really helpful when
  you return. If you want to change names for a specific object on the client
  side. Keys in JSON sometimes don’t conform a certain language standard in
  terms of property names. To make it easy, you can provide aliases for some
  fields.
- Question: Is there a chance to talk about Map and Any here as well?
- Final Question: Scope seems to be way beyond October with input objects. Maybe
  we can find something smaller we can get in first.
- Benjie: Thanks for the feedback.
- First Ivan about non-null:
  - Another use-case are rosemary documents, where you’re editing nodes.
    Sometimes you pull down things from a GraphQL schema, edit them and put them
    back.
  - In terms of creation, where non-nullability would be an issue, you could use
    a different API. However, for the main API the additional non-nullable
    fields aren’t an issue, as you pulled them already before mutating. However
    you’ll need to treat input objects like a struct.
- For aliases:
  - If we allow aliases, it breaks the ability to pull and push back, as you
    might overwrite other fields. Would not be compatible with the goal of the
    spec.
- Map & Untyped:
  - We can keep that separate
- Some people deal with PUT requests instead of the POST. This can deal with the
  PUT problem of HTTP, still in a GraphQL way.
- One of the biggest issues that it introduces.
- Makes it unclear when to use object type vs struct.
- Struct has very specific ues-case, have to be careful to guid people towards
  it.
- Still thinks that the benefits outway the costs.
- Roman: Separating input could get it into the october spec.
- Benjie: Someone would need to separate that out.
- Roman: As long as it’s implemented later, why not.
- Stephen: Addresses a bunch of challenges. Falcor had an atom, which is
  basically a struct. Sometimes things are getting piled into that. UI teams
  call them summary atoms. It might end up in one big blob.
- Ivan: Maybe struct to wuap.
- Lee: Wrapping this up. Advice: Back up from proposal to redefine the problem.
  For input unions that was very helpful. A lot to like, but also opening up a
  lot of things we decided against. Sounds a bit like a panacea. We might solve
  all problems, but in an inadequate way.
- 12min past the hour we continue, 5min break
- [20:07]

## GraphQL definition, SDL Role (20m, @rivantsov)

- [Formal GraphQL Definition](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1017)
- [SDL File, its role and purpose in GraphQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1019)
- [20:13]
- Roman: we have two definitions in the spec, and both are quite unsatisfactory.
  During the discussion of the suggestion, people were saying it's different for
  everybody. We should be definite about what we're building - a client-server
  communication protocol.
- Our domain expertise and experience has shaped what we defined GraphQL as:
  client←communication→server. What should our target domain be? What should the
  concern of the spec be?
- I think it's a communication channel - what's on the wire, what's in the
  communication. Even if client and server are running in the same process. We
  should not presume that our readers have any knowledge outside of this.
- Example: confusion over the schema keyword in SDL.
- So we should define it as a client-server communication protocol - not details
  about what goes on on the server, how the schema is generated.
- Benjie - chat: graphql.js runs on the client... you can printSchema on the
  client...
- Yaacov - chat: I disagree with this line of discussion: the text implies that
  there are entities called schemas and that schemas can be represented by text,
  and that conversion should happen in different ways.
- Michael - chat: I disagree with that statement. If we reduce GraphQL to a
  communication protocol we are a glorified open API spec …
- Benjie - chat: Hard disagree - without the execution engine there's no
  guarantees you can do normalized caching/etc.
- Tim: From a principles perspective, this kinda makes sense. From a practical
  one, what disadvantages do we have if these things are in the spec?
- Roman: we have two definitions of what is GraphQL - both are unsatisfactory,
  both don't make sense. "language for building client" - is it React?
- Yaacov: there's a lot to be said for refining the definition of GraphQL. We
  should a) be consistent, and b) there's always room for improvement when
  describing anything. I would say, it's true that the specification doesn't
  specifically ship an engine, but it certainly ships a specification for an
  engine that has many implementations. Not sure what the English language for
  describing this would be. I think it's worth defining the role of SDL in a
  schema. I feel that there's a 1-to-1 correspondence between introspection and
  the schema itself, and everything can be represented via SDL except execution.
  Saying they're identical ties our hands, maybe that's the hesitation. There's
  an entity we're building, and the textual representation of that entity, and
  we need to go back and forth between these.
- Lee: introspection was the original (and is still the preferred way) to fetch
  the schema from a service. The SDL, historically, was a way to talk about it.
  A tool that people used, and there was demand for codifying how to use that,
  and tooling that relied on it. The discussion between the user of a service
  and a service doesn't actually use the SDL. It's still been useful for it to
  be present. There are a few goals:
  - I don't think it's necessarily about the communication - that's more the
    GraphQL over HTTP spec. As an abstract user of a service - what is your
    understanding of that service.
  - How to model and iterate schemas.
- Roman: [note taker was busy in chat - sorry!]
- Lee: hopefully the history is helpful to guide discussions, but you should be
  able to read the spec as it currently stands - that sounds like a very viable
  goal.
- Lee: I want to ensure that we end up with something actionable. It seems that
  there's confusion when you read through:
  - Tactics, details - where we phrase things in ways that could be clearer. We
    repeat ourselves with lack of clarity. These are probably the lion's share
    of the things that have been merged into the spec ove the past few years.
  - What's the goal, what's the purpose, what's the domain of the spec. I think
    it's "as an observer of a service, what do you expect to see the service
    doing" [paraphrased].
- Roman: as for the definition, just the station, are we agreed that GraphQL is
  a client server communication protocol.
- Michael: it is not. Lee says GraphQL is a coordination layer. That's what the
  main thing about GraphQL is. GraphQL over HTTP details communication.
- Roman: there's transport, and there's communication protocol over the
  transport. Communication protocol: request should be like this, response
  should be like that.
- Michael: but the spec is also about execution behaviour.
- Roman: But why?
- Lee: given a particular request, two service which provide the same schema and
  abide by the same behaviour should give the same result. If not, then building
  tools/etc is challenging. Servers need to know how to produce results, and
  clients how to consume them. We'd introduce a lot of ambiguity without this.
  In spec land we could state the minimum-viable-spec. We could remove all the
  non-normative references and only detail the things that are observable versus
  not observable.
- The non-normative notes is what we've added a lot of and seems to work nicely
  helping people to understand the spec.
- A casual reader/first-time reader is going to come to the GraphQL spec with
  little context - the overview section helps to ground them. It was designed to
  help build client applications - you don't have to use that, but that is why
  it exists. Then we tease it out to the spec domain. Probably what we wrote
  there hasn't been changed since we first published the spec, it can be
  improved.
- Roman: I agree for the same query they should have the same result - the
  observable part should be specified. The historical definitions are not
  satisfactory.
- Lee: I think the thrust of that is right. The observable things are what is
  normative in the spec. The gray area of the spec is where we go above and
  beyond what is observable where we write in how to produce that observed
  result. We don't necessarily have to do that, and we do state that you don't
  have to implement it line for line so long as the observable result is the
  same. If we can reduce non-normative pieces and improve clarity then that's a
  win. Non-normative things that reduce clarity should be removed.
- Lee: I think it's useful to have a set of principles as spec writers that we
  have a shared goal. I think this is something we need to solve, but the
  statement you have may not be the right one - you're getting a lot of pushback
  in the chat.
- Action - if something in the spec lacks clarity and we're not sure how to fix
  it - raise an issue. If you know how to fix it - PR (editorial).
- Action - goal: seems you've done an inwards-out approach that you're getting
  pushback from, maybe you should try an output-in approach where you try and
  pull from people what they feel the domain of the spec is. It seems most of
  the WG has a shared opinion on what that is.
- Roman: think about being a new reader, what should it say.
- Lee: agreed - people should be able to read the spec top to bottom without
  getting confused or having to view another doc.

## Allow Unions to Include Abstract Types (10m, Yaacov)

- [Motivation](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/711)
- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/950)
- [Implementation PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3682)
- [20:45]
- Yaacov: link in agenda spec#950.
- If you have a type that implements an interface, it would be okay to say that
  field's type is a union where all the members of that union are in a parent
  union.
- Currently the only types that can fulfill a union are object types.
- Imagine you have `union Animal = Cow | Wolf | Cat | Dog`.
  `union DomesticatedAnimal = Cat | Dog`.
- GraphQL doesn't currently know that DomesticatedAnimal can satisfy Animal. We
  could allow for it by putting a union in the parent type:
  `type Animal = Cow | Wolf | DomesticatedAnimal`.
- Make GraphQL types more robust.
- If a union is allowed to specify a union or an interface then the schema
  reader would have to scour the schema and could lead to recursive problems. My
  current implementation gets around that by requiring that if a union includes
  a union then it must also specify all the object types that can be in that
  union (and similar for interface).
- All the member types of the union are still specified manually, but we _also_
  add in that it can include the union.
- GraphQL.js needs a change in introspection - possibleTypes would stay the
  same, but we'll add another value called memberTypes that can also include
  unions and interfaces. This should solve all the recursion.
- We also need to add a level of validation to ensure that's true; this is
  similar to interfaces implementing interfaces.
- This doesn't solve everything - e.g. not that a union satisfies an interface,
  but yes that an interface satisfies a union. It might open a window to solve
  that later.
- Benjie: I think this solution solves that recursive problem well.
- Tim: end goal is that syntax in #950 that you include "implements". Do we need
  unions of interfaces before that? Could be on interface level or union level.
- Yaacov: sorry, there's a comment allowed in #939. That's not advanced yet.
  This proposal says `union CowOrCloningInfo` can include `union CloningInfo`.
- TBD if the additional complexity is worth it; I think it is but caution is a
  good idea.
- Lee: long long ago we decided member types should be omitted from unions. I
  wonder if this causes confusion between memberTypes/possibleTypes - I'm
  concerned about that. I disagree with Benjie, I think your previous solve was
  more explicit - every member of this union applies an interface.
- Michael: this also solves a lot of problems for the client - that members of a
  union have these known interface fields.
- Yaacov: I see Lee's point, where do we specify that the child types of a union
  implement something.
- Michael: guaranteeing that members of a union have these know fields is
  useful. This doesn't seem to have such a strong use case.
- Yaacov: a complex type system where you want a guarantee that the relationship
  still holds if you make a change.
- Lee: the robustness is valuable - if you introduce the constraint then you can
  rely on it. Interfaces implementing interfaces - interface describes in a
  broad way, another interface in a narrow way. I impl I allowed B implements A,
  so if you need an A you can pass a B and you'll be good.
- Scalability wise, going back to the parent and adding a type to the list
  concerns me.
- The implements piece is nice because it's local to where you describe the
  constraint.
- Michael: you can also combine them by listing multiple interfaces.
- Ivan: 939 provided benefit to client. Does this provide benefit to the client?
  You can use a directive to process the schema; the question is: does the
  client knowing how the type was built add value? 939 benefits client, but this
  is just a constraint for SDL - implementation detail.
- [9:07]
- Lee: looking at your PR before I was worried about infinite
  recursion/recursion loops. If we allow both interfaces and unions then this is
  something you need to be careful about.
- [9:09] Meeting ended.

## Specifying 'extensions' property on requests (10m, Benjie)

- [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/976)
- [insuffcient time, bumped to next meeting]

## GraphQL spec [Chapters 2,3 - reorder and change titles #1018](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1018) , (10m, @rivantsov)

- [insufficient time, bumped to next meeting]i
