# GraphQL WG Notes - November 2022

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

# Primary meeting

## Agenda

- Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
  Code of Conduct (1m, Lee)
  - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
  - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
  - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- Introduction of attendees (5m, Lee)
- Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
- Review agenda (2m, Lee)
- Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)
  - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
  - [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- Status of express-graphql project (5m, Benjie)
  - [Last published 2 years ago](https://www.npmjs.com/package/express-graphql)
  - [GraphQL Foundation is receiving emails about it](https://github.com/graphql/express-graphql/issues/807#issuecomment-1229599148)
- @deprecated on OBJECT (15m, Stephen)
  - Use case: objects that are members of interfaces and unions
  - [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/997)
- @defer/@stream discussion (20m, Rob)
  - [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/742)
  - [Drop defer/stream support from subscriptions in initial spec proposal?](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/55)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie
- Stephen

## Review agenda (2m, Lee)

- Hugh: how have people found the new cadence?
  - Michael: seems good so far. Smaller slot is nice. Australia slot - I hope
    more people join in future.
  - Lee: we had a healthy audience for the first APAC meeting; mostly Australia,
    but hopefully we'll make more noise and make that pick up.
  - Michael: we need to spread the word a bit.
  - Uri: are we using the official GraphQL twitter account?
  - Lee: we can.
  - Michael: perhaps Uri can reach out to more maintainers.
  - Lee: I'll tweet something about that later today.
  - Lee: Adding a recap to the meetings would be nice
  - Lee: did the secondary EU meeting go well?
  - Benjie: yeah, low attendance but interesting and went well. I didn't have
    access to Zoom until recently so haven't been able to upload the videos yet.
  - Michael: I attended, good stuff for the first meeting.
  - Lee: custom scalars was the main discussion; picking up the repository and
    website. There's a good template in place now.
  - Michael: the scalar stuff is on the next agenda to be picked up too.
  - Lee: There was 11 people in the secondary meeting - very well attended.
    There was discussion around structs, around SDUI, …, and we ran out of time
    for other topics.
- Lee: the next phase of the GraphQL community grant is launching. The form has
  been always open, but we're going to officially decide on granting a few of
  these at the close of this month so that we can hopefully get it started next
  year. Some folks here might want to apply, but we should also promote it on
  other channels. If there are projects that we want to sponsor, Google
  Summer-of-Code style, we could put a section on the Foundation website saying
  here are things that we hope people will do. Documentation would be a great
  use of community grants.
  - Benjie: maybe we can reach out to all the maintainers across the GraphQL
    repositories?
  - Lee: there's a `@graphql/maintainers` that we could ping in GitHub
    Discussions.
  - Michael: we should retweet on the GraphQL Twitter because sometimes people
    miss it in GitHub.
  - Lee: indeed, collecting information from the main contributors would be a
    good project because we don't have a good way to reach out to them.
  - Lee: I'm going to open a GitHub discussion
  - Hugh: we've used a Devrel tool at Apollo called Orbit; it's great at
    connecting to different sources like GitHub and tagging people so you can
    reach out to them in future, e.g. "GraphQL OSS contributors".
    https://orbit.love
  - Lee: https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/discussions/1165

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)

- [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
- Lee: No items ready for review. Let’s look for stagnant items
- [[2021-03-04] Add prose to explain why scalar fields must have the same type when composing](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/646)
  (#646)
  - Lee: Close as Not Planned
- [[2021-06-03] Ensure clarity in the unicode support spec changes](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/778)
  (#778)
  - Lee: Done
- [[2021-06-03] Create a document in this repo so interested people can add themselves to @implementors](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/790)
  (#790)
  - Lee: Close for now
- [[2021-06-03] Work on validation/execution of Fragment Arguments RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/791)
  (#791)
  - Lee: Leaving open for now. Still active discussion
- [[2021-09-02] Raise GraphQL.js PR relating to relaxing field selection merging rules and speak to client developers](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/796)
  (#796)
  - Issue to open a PR, Sasha.
  - Ivan: this rule is causing a lot of problems (including perf problems); it's
    one of the most complex rules we have. From time to time we have issues with
    recursion, performance issues. There was a big email thread about this -
    merging fragments.
  - Ivan: I think it's important, but if anyone wants to take it on (especially
    communicating with the clients and doing the research); I can help with the
    GraphQL.js implementation (especially because it's cutting out stuff) - I'd
    be happy for someone to adopt it, I think it's very important.
  - Michael: summary: two fragments, same field, different types?
  - Ivan: not exactly. Yes; it's the connection between types. Do we allow
    disjoint types in the response?
  - Michael: Lee said that the Java generator had issues originally which is why
    the rule was introduced.
  - Ivan: it's not just ergonomic, the rule itself is problematic. We could try
    to fix it, but it adds a lot of unnecessary complexity and potential
    problems.

## Status of express-graphql project (5m, Benjie)

- [Last published 2 years ago](https://www.npmjs.com/package/express-graphql)
- [GraphQL Foundation is receiving emails about it](https://github.com/graphql/express-graphql/issues/807#issuecomment-1229599148)
- People are concerned that it doesn’t support GraphQL-16. Hasn’t been a release
  in two years. Are we still maintaining it? Still a reference impl? Or should
  we archive it.
- Michael: I wouldn’t archive it. Especially with GraphQL-over-HTTP spec on the
  horizon, this could be implemented there
- Matt: +1
- Hugh: Ivan has some time to work on it
- Ivan: We discussed for GraphQL.js how to not have it depend on a single
  person.
  - Solution: a review team. 5 people from different organizations. They have
    admin access.
  - Important to discuss differences between code ownership and those
    participating in WGs. WG is welcome, but not everyone will have aptitude or
    interest. Part of maintainers burdon is contributors submitting nonstandard
    code.
  - Will do a release today
  - Identify serial contributors ask to join as reviewer
- Uri: Happy to see several merged PRs today, but in last few years not much
  - This uses express. Not necessarily the default.
  - Should ref impl determine which http framework you use?
  - GraphQL-over-HTTP working group. Testing library to validate framework to
    see if it follows the spec
  - There are other server impls that have active communities. People might try
    to use the reference impl, and I wouldn’t recommend that because it isn’t as
    actively maintained.
  - _Are we doing more harm by having it out there?_
  - The last person to maintain the library was Daniel. He went on to a
    different project with a different vision
  - I believe the having all of the pieces with suite of tests we get what we
    would want from a reference implementation
- Michael: It's good having a testing library, but the reference example is
  useful - e.g. Apollo Server, Helix, etc all add more than the spec. It's a
  good thing to look at how someone has implemented the spec text, so I think
  it's valuable.
- Derek: I think a reference implementation is good. Maybe the foundation can
  put some funds in (pay someone to keep it up to date)
- Lee: we have the community grant!
- Denis: A reference implementation should not just be something that implements
  the specification - it should be something that you can read code-wise and
  then implement in any other language.
  [GraphQL-HTTP](https://github.com/enisdenjo/graphql-http) is written with this
  idea in mind, it's simple, it's server-agnostic, and shows how you could
  implement this yourself in JS or in any other programming language. I've also
  gone through the GraphQL over HTTP spec and wrote a regression suite for it
  that you can run against any GraphQL over HTTP API. The name `express-graphql`
  also brings this expectation that it's to be used with Express, which is an
  older framework now. I'm already keeping this up to date with the
  GraphQL-over-HTTP spec, I enjoy doing this.
- Lee: we have the right input. Clear: loads of people are using express-graphql
  (can we make sure these dependencies don't break); either we have to support
  it in the short term (thanks Ivan for merging PRs). We may need an exit plan -
  what does it look like to migrate from this to something else. I agree with
  your statement of goals, Denis. Ultimately someone needs to own this, own the
  space, and my opinion is that that person should be deep in the weeds of
  GraphQL-over-HTTP. Denis, if you want to be that, it would make sense for us
  to put our trust in you that this goes smoothly.
- Denis: I don't think there'll be much friction moving from express-graphql to
  graphql-http, but we can create a migration plan.
- Hugh: does this mean graphql-http needs to become a Foundation owned project.
- Lee: there's ambiguity over what the reference implementation is. The
  reference implementation should live within the GraphQL org, which shouldn't
  affect your ability to manage it.
- Denis: I want to have ultimate control of it, be able to change the code how I
  want, and govern the code style of the repo. If that's okay with everyone then
  I'm happy it living under the GraphQL foundation.
- Michael: these things are typically owned by one person, so I think that's
  fine.
- Lee: there are technical changes (e.g. it'll be managed by the technical
  group), but how you want to operate it should work fine.
- Uri: does upgrading express-graphql send the wrong message? Maybe we should
  send a very clear message on express-graphql itself that it's not maintained
  and people should not use it. Do we need to move it under the Foundation? At
  the Guild we have this philosophy that Foundation projects move slow (for all
  sorts of reasons, good reasons); this project is moving quickly and no-one
  seems to have negative feedback on. We can always fork it (because it's MIT
  licensed) and move it under the foundation if Denis does anything that we
  disagree with, but assuming that doesn't happen moving it to Foundation
  removes some of Denis' credit. And if Denis goes rogue we can always move a
  fork to the Foundation then. Mostly I'm worried about the projects being
  maintained for the long term.
- Lee: our goal should be to make it as valuable a process as possible - if
  value is lost when it goes into foundation core, then that's not a good
  process. First: lets give credit! Put a message at the top of the README or
  similar. The main advantage is that we would be giving a safety net to the
  community, that should be pure value.
- Lee: I think the main reason that projects move slow is that they don't have
  impassioned primary maintainers.
- Michael: personally I think it gives you more credibility because it's under
  the Foundation. I definitely don't think you're taking credit away.
- Lee: let's open a discussions thread if there's any more to discuss here. If
  graphql-http is the source of truth then we have to make that very clear, and
  give everyone a good sense of why this is a good thing.

## @deprecated on OBJECT (15m, Stephen)

- Use case: objects that are members of interfaces and unions
- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/997)
- [18:26]
- Stephen: Use case: [slideshow]. `Animal = Dog | Baiji` (via interface); but
  Baiji hasn't been seen for 20 years. Clients' shouldn't be spreading on the
  `Baiji` type when looking at the Animal interface. We could mark the Baiji
  type as deprecated (OBJECT location for `@deprecated` directive) - indicates
  to clients not to spread on this. Can be used in tooling, etc. The `Baiji`
  type is only referenced as part of an interface, it's never referenced in the
  schema directly. In the spec I've put a `SHOULD NOT` to say that you shouldn't
  have a deprecated object type be referenced by un-deprecated fields.
- Lee: interesting. The reason for deprecation was that removing something would
  be a client-side breaking change. Is this a similar case? Removing the object
  from the union/interface would be a breaking change.
- Stephen: yes it does, because of validation - if they spread on a type that
  isn't part of the interface then servers will reject that query.
- Matt: that exact case has happened, people removing types from an interface
  and this becoming a breaking change.
- Lee: Makes sense; the fragment spread itself is the thing that fails
  validation if you remove a type from an interface.
- Matt: making it a MUST that a non-deprecated field cannot reference a
  deprecated type would make that stronger; and make it a validation rule.
- Lee: deprecation is quite narrow right now; but if you remove everything from
  the schema that's deprecated then the resulting schema should still be valid.
  So yes, this is something that should be a MUST for us to stick to this rule.
- Matt: do we have the rule that if a field is deprecated on a type then it must
  also be deprecated on any interface?
- Lee: good question
- Ivan: no, we don't have this rule.
- Stephen: sounds like another PR; it probably should - right?
- Lee: yeah, it's surprising that hasn't come up in the Facebook API.
- Matt: interface fields tend to be Hack/PHP; everyone gets the same
  implementation (same code executed) - deprecating it deprecates it everywhere.
- ACTION - validate this.
- Stephen: at runtime, should a server be able to return a deprecated object as
  part of a union/interface.
- Lee: that's interesting because so far deprecation is about what the client
  can ask for. We've not needed a mechanism like that.
- Matt: I don't think it's possible to say that the server cannot return with
  that deprecated type; you can have a non-nullable deprecated field that
  returns a deprecated type - so you must return something.
- Benjie: but that only applies to concrete references rather than
  interfaces/unions, right?
- Stephen: is that it's deprecated a promise to the client that it won't appear
  in a union/interface any more.
- Matt: we don't make promises about unions/interfaces because clients have to
  be compatible with future schemas, so this is just like any future type. Your
  client should be robust to receiving this no-longer expected type.
- Lee: if the client only looks at the subset of the schema that's not
  deprecated, then it receiving the deprecated type could be an old type or a
  new type and they're effectively the same: an unknown (unsupported) type.
- Stephen: what's the RFC phase of this?
- Lee: Phase 1; some big open questions, but it's a real problem that people
  have experienced.
- Stephen: next steps; change wording to MUST.
- Lee: for Phase 2 you need consensus that the direction is correct - especially
  around deprecating the type versus deprecating its membership to an
  interface/union. And you need a spec PR that shows how it would work.

## @defer/@stream discussion (20m, Rob)

- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/742)
- [Drop defer/stream support from subscriptions in initial spec proposal?](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/55)
- Rob: In the Primary October meeting we spoke about Defer/Stream and
  subscriptions. It's not clear exactly how to handle this, so we discussed
  whether we should omit subscriptions support for now to get stream/defer out.
  We considered adding a validation rule that forbids subscriptions using
  @defer/@stream, but this means that you can't use fragments in subscriptions
  that you might use elsewhere that use defer/stream. We also considered doing
  an execution-phase error. We also considered requiring that the `if:` argument
  is used to disable them on subscriptions.
- Should we be multiplexing these payloads? My implementation waits to drain all
  responses from the current event before processing the next subscription
  event.
- Lee: how much potential churn is there in continuing down the path of
  multiplexing?
- Rob: it's not been explored very much, and I definitely think there could be
  some workshopping/bikeshedding on it.
- Lee: I feel pretty strongly that we should not make stream/defer
  all-or-nothing. It may be the case that your implementation has constraints on
  how payloads are treated for mutations versus queries. Enforcing an
  implementor to support stream/defer for queries, mutations AND subscriptions,
  OR none, then that's a rough position to put them in. This seems like an
  important thing to get right.
- Matt: I'm a huge fan of using validation rules to get incremental wins when
  the behavior of what you want to build is not figured out. For example in the
  spec we could have a directive that you add to query/mutation/subscription
  like `@deferStreamEnabled`; then on the server you state you only support
  defer/stream on queries and if you find defer/stream on other operations then
  they're not valid.
- Michael: agree, also validation rules give syntax errors before you even send
  it to the server. Not a fan of the field error options.
- Lee: tricky part with validation rule is that there's this additional unknown
  piece of information that we'd need to add to introspection - does the server
  support streaming for query/subscription/etc - so that the client knows
  whether the operation is valid or not.
- Matt: that seems reasonable to do. E.g. adding a directive to the root Query
  Mutation Subscription types. We have a whole bunch of servers right now that
  don't support it,
- Rob: the case of sharing fragments is my main concern, especially with Relay.
  It would prevent you using defer in your query if you can't also use it with
  your mutation/subscription.
- Michael: in Relay the fragment is bound to a component, right? You tend to
  have a much smaller footprint for a subscription.
- Matt: at Meta we'd get into the problems that Rob's explaining. For Relay,
  Relay has a compiler, we can just strip them out.
- Hugh: Apollo Client doesn't have a compiler, but we can give a dev-time
  warning. Users would have to know to do it.
- Matt: it's impetus for someone running into this problem to solve.
- Hugh: do we agree that we can move defer/stream ahead without subscriptions?
- Michael: there's so much good stuff that people could use.
- Hugh: we've got really promising usage data. There's not been any issues with
  subscriptions because people aren't thinking about it.
- Lee: framing it as a user saying "we can't support it in subscriptions, what
  should we do" is a different way of framing the problem that may help solve
  it.
- Lee: I'm favoring option 2 - it doesn't rule out the ability for a tool to add
  extra validation rules. Untangling how to get around the validation rule would
  be non-obvious, and figuring out when to apply or not would be non-obvious
  too.
- Michael: server can ignore defer, that's okay, so why not just do that?
- Rob: we talked about that in the primary meeting - is it a breaking change if
  you had a subscription that never deferred/streamed and now suddenly it does?
- Matt: yes
- Michael: it could be.
- Lee: the forward compatibility problem there is less good.
- Michael: It's easy to create 3000 patches with a couple streams and a defer.
  People could use this in a nefarious way against your server, so it's critical
  that the server can ignore these because they could harm the server. The
  client should not be fixated on patches, it should deal with different patch
  styles, different kinds of patches.
- Lee: we're at time. Rob, you seem to have directionally correct feedback: yes
  this is a problem that needs solving. Maybe you can explore a little bit about
  how to apply the disabling?
- Rob: seems we're not clear on option 1 or 2?
- Lee: I prefer option 2 but it sounds like there's mixed opinions.
- Hugh: sounds like we're okay with separating subscriptions out of this.
- [19:03] Meeting ends

# Secondary meeting - APAC

## Agenda

1. Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and
   Code of Conduct (1m, Lee)
   - [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
   - [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
   - [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
   - [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
2. Introduction of attendees (5m, Lee)
3. Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
4. Review agenda (2m, Lee)
5. Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)
   - [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
   - [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
   - [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
6. [GraphQL Scalars](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-scalars) licensing and
   domain setup (15m, Donna)
7. References (20m, Yaacov)
   - [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/998)
   - Background:
     [robrichard/defer-stream-wg#58](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/58)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie

## Review agenda (2m, Lee)

- Videos: they've not been uploaded yet? Automation issue?
- Benjie: there's no automation; I didn't have access to Zoom for a while, so am
  behind.
- Donna: {Possible automation suggested for Zoom -> YouTube uploads}
- Lee: Aim to have more cross-meeting check-ins (recaps, etc)
- Community grant:
  - If interested, you should apply
  - We should collect proposed focus areas for the grants
    - e.g. website needs work
    - docs could be improved
  - Think about community grants as summer of code - pitch projects and have
    people apply to do them?
- Recap: express-graphql had no primary maintainer, isn't up to date with
  graphql-js, didn't seem like it was best placed for the GraphQL-over-HTTP
  spec, graphql-http module now implements that spec, and has been moved under
  the foundation with a stellar maintainer.
  - [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-http](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-http)
  - [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http)
- Recap: defer/stream vs subscriptions: entire domain of stuff that we haven't
  handled: multiplex or not, what happens if errors happen in the middle, etc?
  Rob's pitched not having defer/stream on subscriptions, but we still have to
  figure out HOW to do that.
- (Yaacov not present, so agenda item bumped.)

## [GraphQL Scalars](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-scalars) licensing and domain setup (15m, Donna)

- Donna: Aligning license with rest of GraphQL projects
- Andi: Copied setup process of GraphQL spec to minimize overhead, ease
  maintenance. Produce HTML, deploy to GitHub pages.
- Andi: we need a domain entry for scalars.graphql.org
- Andi: is the domain legally owned by the Foundation?
- Lee: yes, Linux Foundation has the tools for managing domains. I'll arrange
  with Elisa.
- Benjie (chat):
  [https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/](https://graphql.github.io/graphql-over-http/)
  Can we get similar domain for this repo?
- Lee (chat): yes!
- Andi: we should use the same license as for the spec, since it's text rather
  than code?
- Lee: seems to make sense. Are the specs licensed and owned by GraphQL
  Foundation? That seems easiest way, especially to allow multiple contributors.
- Andi: yes, just like spec contributions. Manual review, to ensure it doesn't
  violate CoC/legals/etc.
- Andi: if I publish a spec, I _want_ to have it shared, available, etc.
- Lee: maybe we should have one license doc, rather than copy/pasting legal text
  into the templates. License file at the top of the repo, and link at the top
  of the template that says "licensed via {this file}". Then copy/paste the
  legal text out of GraphQL spec; I'll ensure it's done correctly.
- Lee: the copyright notice might be not quite the right thing.
- Andi: having the infrastructure in place (license, domain) will bring us to a
  really good place.
- Andi: we should write a short blog post about it, and tweet it on twitter to
  promote it. I think our blog posts are under utilised.
- Lee: totally agree, I just haven't had the time. Write it, send it as a PR and
  we'll get it merged.
- Donna: what's the repo?
- Benjie (chat):
  [https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/tree/source/src/content/blog](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/tree/source/src/content/blog)
- Lee: automatically deployed as things get merged
- Donna: so just a markdown file for someone to write a blog post
- Lee: we don't put enough effort into sharing the results of the group, we
  should make a point to share more of them here.

# Secondary meeting - EU

## Agenda
