# GraphQL WG Notes - November 2025

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

### TSC elections

Lee: November-December tend to move very slowly. The last batch of TSC ends in
January. We need to update.

TSC nominations are open all of the time.

Suggestion: kick off votes in January

(Thumbs up from the audience)

### Reminder: grants available for key initiatives

AI grants are welcome

### RFC: Object Identification / **id meta field & **Entity meta interface

Lenz: the client has no schema knowledge. This makes it hard to inject the “id”
field

Linters are hard to setup. People forget to add them all the times, etc…

Matt (in chat): we have this internally and it’s not good enough.

Lee: id may represent different things. Maybe it’s the identifier, maybe it’s a
refetchable token, maybe it’s a cache key.

Matt (in chat): we have found a limiting factor is the need to continue to fetch
`__typename` which greatly limits our schema evolution.

Lee: we could build referential transparency

Matt: this was a thing at facebook. But:

- strong != fetchable
- What you want is something short and globally unique.

The typenames are maybe long (~30, ~40) and that adds to the payload size.

Schema evolution becomes hard if you depend on typename. For an example, you
can’t change an object to an interface.

Lee (in chat): use `__key` instead of `id`

Lee: would be nice to have someone from Meta brain dump what they have tried.

Lee: something that serves multiple purposes is hard. Uncoupling would be good
and allow graph mode response formats, etc…

Lee: moving to RFC1

### Updating the description of Fragments in the spec

Benjie: we really really strongly should be encouraging this.

We should also have it in the documentation but it should be in the spec.

Lee: non-normative note

The spec should be careful about best practices, it’s more about requirements.

Janette: “component” isn’t great, let’s figure out a better word for “component”

Janette: We should have a separate client spec! Describing client best practices
is hard in the current spec

Matt: should we put motivation in the spec? It feels separate from the spec.

### Release trains

### Capabilities

Benjie: we can do the capabilities

### defer/stream Updates
