# GraphQL WG Notes - October 2025

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

Agenda:
https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2025/10-Oct/02-wg-primary.md

Matt Mahonney is MC for the meeting

## AI working group

- Starts on October 23rd
- Might conflict with the HTTP wg
- Martin: HTTP wg has been very quiet
- Pascal: AI WG - do we have a repo?

## Move gateway performance benchmark repo and federation audit repo under the foundation

- Skipped: Review Sept Secondary Meeting
- Benjie -
  [@matches directive](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/1817/files).

## Update description of Fragments in the spec

- Janette: do we need to make this a RFC?
- Benjie: I would consider this editorial
- Benjie: could use some rewording maybe? But overall support
- Kewei: Should we defined modularity because it hasn’t appeared in the spec?
- Martin: should we merge and iterate?
- Matt: Goal is to get this merged next month
  - We probably need more approval from TSC
  - Ping people if not responsive
- Janette: Will remove the fake function + rethink introducing the word
  “modularity”
- Benjie - Fragments allow client components and logic to describe their
  specific data requirements locally. Fragments can then be composed together to
  form a GraphQL operation to issue to the server.

## How to get involved in the working group

- RFCs requiring champions: [https://benjie.dev/rfcs/](https://benjie.dev/rfcs/)
- Documentations
