# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2025-10-02T17:28:00Z
- Meeting end: 2025-10-02T18:09:10Z
- Summary start: 2025-10-02T17:29:40Z
- Summary end: 2025-10-02T18:09:10Z

The meeting began with introductions and administrative discussions about recording guidelines and participation agreements. The team reviewed and approved the creation of a new GraphQL AI working group, including scheduling their first meeting and planning a blog post announcement. Various technical discussions took place regarding specification updates, documentation contributions, and ongoing issues with filtering and querying in GraphQL, with the team addressing these challenges through proposed solutions and future planning.

## Next Steps

- Jeanette to update the PR for fragments in the spec by removing the "fake function name" and proposing options for the term "modularity".
- TSC members to review and approve Jeanette's PR on fragments description in the spec.
- Benjie to check with Lee about whether merging PRs is allowed during the current spec freeze period.
- Emily to review the RFC tracker and links shared to find areas to contribute to GraphQL.
- Benjie/TSC to consider making the RFC Explorer tool an official GraphQL project.
- Benjie to close the "ensure use of composite term" agenda item.
- Jory to publish the blog post announcement about the AI Working Group on October 7th on GraphQL.org.
- Uri and Frederick to present the Gateway Performance Benchmark Repo topic at the next meeting.

## Summary

### Meeting Introductions and Guidelines

The meeting began with informal discussions about the flu wave in France and the weather before Matt, as the temporary meeting chair, introduced participants. The group discussed the meeting's recording and agreed to follow the membership agreement and participation guidelines. Participants from various companies, including Meta, Apollo, Amazon, and First Aid, introduced themselves, with Benjie absent due to dinner. Pascal mentioned his open pull request, which was noted to auto-merge.

### GraphQL AI Working Group Launch

The meeting focused on agenda management, note-taking coordination, and the establishment of a new GraphQL AI working group. Kawaii presented a proposal for the GraphQL AI working group, which was approved by the TSC members present. The group's first meeting was scheduled for October 23rd, with Jory's blog post announcement planned for October 7th. Benjie confirmed that the working group repository had been created and was available for joining.

### Fragments Specification Update Discussion

The team discussed a pull request to update the description of fragments in the specification. Jeanette explained the proposed changes to better reflect the intended use of fragments for evolving data needs rather than for extracting common selections from executable documents. Benjie suggested the changes were editorial and did not require an RFC, while the team agreed on the importance of improving the wording to avoid confusion. They decided to merge the PR after making some suggested changes, such as removing references to "client logic" and considering alternative wording for "modularity." Lee supported the idea of merging the PR when there is general agreement, allowing further refinement if needed before the next meeting.

### Guidance on GraphQL Contribution

Emily discussed her interest in contributing to GraphQL and sought guidance on where to start. Benjie suggested focusing on documentation, as it's always evolving and critical, while also mentioning that there are various projects and RFCs that need advancement. Lee and Michael highlighted the need for champions to push forward RFCs and mentioned the GraphQL RFC Explorer tool created by Benjie, which he suggested should be made an official project. They also discussed the stages of RFCs and the importance of contributing to working groups and technical tasks. Emily agreed to review the provided links and explore areas of interest for contribution.

### Editorial Changes and UI Solutions

The team discussed the importance of editorial changes in specifications, noting that many such changes uncover esoteric bugs and improve clarity. They emphasized the value of contributing to specifications and using Discord workgroup channels for quick feedback. Benjie shared details from a secondary meeting with Mark about addressing issues with polymorphic types and server-driven UI, where empty objects could be returned for unsupported widget types. The team explored potential solutions, including passing arguments to fields to specify supported widget types.

### GraphQL Filtering and Querying Challenges

Benjie discussed a challenging issue with filtering and querying in GraphQL, explaining that the place of filtering may not align with the place of querying, especially in nested structures. He proposed a potential solution using a directive that could accept arguments, but several questions remain about its implementation. Lee expressed interest in the problem and agreed to read more about the proposal, which is documented in an RFC in the GraphQL WG repository.

### GraphQL AI Working Group Launch

The GraphQL AI Working Group's first meeting was scheduled for October 23rd, with a blog post by Jory set to be published on GraphQL.org on October 7th. The group conducted a vote and sent personal invites to LLM-related speakers from GraphQLConf, with most confirming attendance. Matt noted that the Gateway Performance Benchmark Repo discussion was postponed as the champions were not present. Benjie confirmed that the composite term issue had been addressed and closed.
