# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2025-11-06T18:30:00Z
- Meeting end: 2025-11-06T19:57:21Z
- Summary start: 2025-11-06T18:30:37Z
- Summary end: 2025-11-06T19:57:19Z

The Apollo Working Group meeting covered TSC elections, grants, and updates to the GraphQL specification, including discussions on object identification and fragment usage. The team agreed on implementing a regular release schedule and discussed various GraphQL capabilities, including error handling modes and schema introspection. They also reviewed specifications for service capabilities and stream features, while addressing questions about back compatibility and runtime introspection.

## Next Steps

- Lee: Update TSC charter with revised election timeline
- Lee: Fix outdated copy at the top of TSC nominations link
- Lee: Post TSC nomination announcements on other platforms
- Benjie: Encourage community members to apply for grants, especially for GraphQL and AI integration projects
- Lee: Do editorial pass on Jeanette's fragment descriptions PR and merge it
- Lee: Ensure GraphQL documentation for fragments mirrors the spec changes with elaborated best practices
- Matt : Brain dump learnings about internal ID/caching implementations into the RFC thread
- Lenz: Continue developing object identification RFC with focus on caching use case and global uniqueness requirements
- Lee: Review capabilities spec PR
- Martin/Benjie: Build GraphQL.js implementation for capabilities
- Community: Implement capabilities in other languages
- Community: Test capabilities with real-life use cases
- Benjie: Consider splitting capabilities PR into two parts
- Benjie: Add automated agenda items for spec release at T-minus 3, 2, and 1 months before September release date
- TSC members: Review Rob's defer/stream PR for response section
- Rob: Continue building out examples appendix for defer/stream based on feedback
- Benjie: Create standalone RFC for include deprecated as schema-level feature via service entry point

## Summary

### Apollo Working Group Meeting Introduction

The Apollo Working Group meeting began with Lee welcoming attendees and reminding them of the meeting's recording and publication practices. Lee introduced the agenda and requested a round-robin introduction of attendees by name and face. The meeting was set to follow the agenda in the order specified in the agenda file.

### TSC Elections and Grant Updates

The meeting focused on TSC elections, grants, and other updates. Lee proposed shifting the TSC election timeline to avoid winter break delays, with nominations opening now and votes scheduled for January. Benjie reminded attendees about available grants for Foundation projects, emphasizing the need to apply before the year-end budget reset. Lee also highlighted the priority of AI-related GraphQL projects for community grants, following discussions at the recent conference.

### GraphQL ID Proposal Discussion

The meeting focused on a proposal to improve object identification in GraphQL, particularly for clients without schema knowledge. Lenz presented two ideas: adding a universally queryable underscore_ID field and an underscore_entity interface to mark types that will always have an ID. Lee and Matt discussed the importance of making cache keys globally unique and distinct from object identifiers. The group agreed to narrow the focus to caching purposes only, avoiding overloading the ID concept with multiple uses. Next steps include clearly defining guarantees and limitations of the cache key system, and Matt will share insights from their internal implementations to avoid previous mistakes.

### GraphQL Fragment Documentation Updates

The team discussed updating the GraphQL specification to better explain the purpose and usage of fragments. Jeanette proposed changes to emphasize that fragments should map to client logic components and help with evolving data needs. Benjie argued for a stronger recommendation of a specific naming convention and pattern for fragments, while Lee suggested adding this information to non-normative notes in the specification. The team agreed that while the spec should remain minimal, the documentation could provide more detailed guidance on best practices for using fragments.

### Streamlined Release Schedule Implementation

The team agreed to implement a regular release schedule, with Lee suggesting annual releases aligned with September to avoid conflicts with summer holidays. They decided to automate the process by adding release-related agenda items three months before each cut, with Benjie offering to incorporate this into his existing agenda generation system. The group also discussed maintaining work in the main branch unless specific circumstances required a release branch, and agreed to track important pull requests for each release.

### GraphQL Capabilities and Extensions

The meeting focused on discussing GraphQL capabilities and related specifications. Martin presented slides on capabilities, including error handling modes and their implementation across different languages. Benjie proposed a new extension for schema introspection. The group discussed the need for a GraphQL.js implementation and reviewed a pull request for service capabilities. Lee and Benjie addressed questions about back compatibility and runtime introspection. The team agreed to split the service capabilities feature into two parts: operation descriptions and error behaviors. Rob provided an update on the defer and stream specifications, highlighting new examples in the appendix. The conversation ended with Benjie suggesting improvements to the schema's handling of deprecated fields.
