# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2025-12-04T18:27:44Z
- Meeting end: 2025-12-04T20:06:13Z
- Summary start: 2025-12-04T18:31:53Z
- Summary end: 2025-12-04T20:03:47Z

The GraphQL Working Group meeting covered updates to the TSC nomination process and discussed changes to the editorial guidelines, including communication methods and release timelines. The team explored various technical implementations including field extensions, schema modifications, and type filtering capabilities, with extensive discussion around syntax and validation approaches. The conversation ended with conversations about implementing constants in schema specifications and exploring solutions for type matching and validation challenges.

## Next Steps

- Martin: Create an issue for TSC elections to allow questions and enable broader communication/tweeting about the process
- Lee: Set up issue for TSC elections by copying from previous years and broadcast to TSC members
- TSC members: Review the handbooks project and provide feedback/thumbs up to Benjie
- Martin: Go back to Andy about versioning in scalars repo and open a pull request for discussion
- Martin: Have conversation with Andy about establishing primary maintainer for scalars repo and TSC review rotation
- Martin: Organize Issue Club meeting for second Thursday of January to review GitHub issues and pull requests
- Emily: Start working on GraphQLJS implementation for field extensions RFC
- Emily: Message Benjie offline for guidance on schema coordinates implementation
- Matt: Chat with Emily about set-based syntax learnings from Relay OSS compiler work
- Mark: Put together more cohesive direction on matches directive semantics and requirements
- Mark: Prepare agenda item on declaring constants in schema for next working group meeting

## Summary

### GraphQL Working Group Meeting Updates

The GraphQL Working Group meeting began with introductions from Benjie, Lee, Martin, Benoit, and Zach. Lee then provided an update on the TSC elections process, noting that self-nominations are now open. Benjie reported making editorial edits to the elections process, including changes to term dates and fixing minor errors in the TSC documents. He also recommended removing outdated contact information and suggested using Discord for communication. The group discussed the reduction of this year's Advent of Code to 12 days without a leaderboard, and Benoit mentioned the absence of a maintainer funding mechanism.

### GraphQL Foundation Process Updates

The meeting discussed updates to the TSC nomination process, with Lee announcing an evergreen form and plans to start voting in January. Benjie presented a new handbook project aimed at documenting processes for various GraphQL Foundation programs, and the TSC was asked to review it before making it public. Martin highlighted the implementation of release trains, with the next one scheduled for August 2026, and Lee confirmed the timeline for announcing and reviewing new releases. The meeting also touched on the need to address unmerged scalar contributions in the GraphQL repository.

### GraphQL Specification Merge Guidelines

The team discussed merging practices for GraphQL scalar specifications, focusing on reducing friction while maintaining quality. They agreed to implement a two-week review window with the default answer being "yes" to merge, though Benjie noted exceptions for significant specification changes that should be handled as new versions. Martin and Lee discussed versioning, with Martin noting that Andy intentionally designed the system without versioning, though Matt and others suggested adding version numbers to help users identify the latest specifications. The team concluded that they need to establish clear guidelines for reviews and determine which TSC members will serve as primary reviewers, with Andy potentially volunteering to oversee the repository.

### GraphQL Issue Club Implementation Plan

The team discussed implementing an "Issue Club" meeting to address stale pull requests and maintenance issues in the GraphQL repositories. Martin proposed holding a one-hour meeting every three months to review and address outstanding issues, with Benjie suggesting that closed issues could be re-opened by new champions. Lee proposed using GitHub assignees to track issue owners and implementing a process to close unclaimed issues after two reviews. The discussion concluded with Martin indicating that the initial focus would be on the GraphQL WG and GraphQL spec repositories, with potential expansion to include the scalars repository.

### GraphQL Field Extension RFC Discussion

Emily discussed the RFC for field extensions and sought feedback on her syntax and implementation approach. Lee and Benjie provided guidance, emphasizing the importance of using GraphQLJS for implementation and considering the unique aspects of schema coordinates. They discussed the potential for extending fields to add directives and arguments, as well as the need to ensure the design allows for future functionality. The team agreed that exploring the implementation in GraphQLJS would be informative for determining the best syntax and grammar rules.

### GraphQL Schema Extension Discussion

The team discussed extending GraphQL schemas, with Matt presenting research on schema set operations and Benjie suggesting a simpler "add" syntax instead of "merge". Lee noted that defining syntax for partial schema subsets is challenging, and the team agreed to keep the RFC focused while exploring future possibilities. Mark mentioned that combining the schema coordinate parser with GraphQLJS is technically feasible, though Lee expressed uncertainty about whether reusing the grammar rules would work. The discussion concluded with Benjie raising questions about syntax differences between extending fields on interfaces versus object types, which Lee suggested should be decided by the RFC champion.

### Client-Side Union Type Filtering RFC

Mark presented an RFC for a "matches directive" that allows clients to specify which types they can support in a union, inspired by Relay's approach. Lee clarified that this is intended to be client-side only and compiled away. Benjie explained the problem of clients needing to filter types they can understand, and Mark proposed using an argument with the matches directive to indicate this filtering capability. The group discussed potentially creating a community specs page on GraphQL.org to showcase similar specifications, and Mark suggested tagging in the Apollo team to implement runtime transforms for this feature.

### GraphQL Type Filtering and Caching

The team discussed challenges with GraphQL type filtering and caching, particularly around how to handle different field selections in normalized caches. Lee proposed an alternative approach where type information would be encoded in the data model rather than the schema, suggesting that a tagged union structure could eliminate the need for explicit type names in queries. Benjie pointed out that this approach would still require filtering by selected fields, and Mark suggested adding request and response validation rules to enforce matches directive behavior at runtime.

### GraphQL Type System Improvements

The team discussed challenges with GraphQL type systems and fragment matches over union types. Lee suggested exploring alternatives to fragment matches, such as a tagged union approach that could solve issues with unions and interfaces. Benjie proposed a new query syntax using double curly braces to allow spreads only, which would be supported by newer GraphQL servers and indicated via the capabilities system. The team also considered how this would work with nested queries and connections.

### GraphQL Union Type Challenges

The team discussed challenges with GraphQL union types and query syntax, with Lee expressing concern about "lipstick on a pig" solutions that don't address fundamental issues. Mark acknowledged that while Relay provides a working solution, they should formalize it as a community spec rather than waiting for a better solution. Benjie identified that the main missing feature is the ability to indicate special arguments through introspection, which is blocked by issue 300, and proposed adding a special property to indicate type names in the schema as a temporary solution.

### GraphQL Server Validation Implementation

The team discussed implementing a capability spec that would allow server-side validation of input values, with Benjie clarifying that this would require changes to the GraphQLJS executor rather than just validation rules. Lee expressed concerns about the complexity of the proposed solution, noting that it might add unnecessary overhead for a limited benefit, while Matt suggested the need for directives or arguments that accept constant values to improve security. The discussion concluded with Mark acknowledging that the solution would need to be implemented upstream rather than as a user-land feature, as it would affect the executor's behavior.

### Schema Constants Implementation Discussion

The group discussed the implementation of constants in schema specifications, with Mark expressing interest in formalizing the approach due to its practical value at Yelp. Matt suggested improving the relay spec for matches by incrementally addressing issues like raw string validation, while Benjie proposed using execution rules instead of constants for better compatibility with clients unaware of the schema. Lee emphasized the need to clarify the semantics and domains of the problems being solved before finalizing the syntax, as this would determine the necessary changes to execution engines and validation processes. Mark committed to further exploring these issues and developing a cohesive direction.
