# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2026-02-19T18:30:04Z
- Meeting end: 2026-02-19T19:57:08Z
- Summary start: 2026-02-19T18:30:04Z
- Summary end: 2026-02-19T19:57:06Z

The GraphQL specification working group met to review a pull request for incremental delivery, focusing on terminology and response format changes. Benjie, Martin, and Rob discussed updates to initial execution results, execution update results, and the use of payload versus value terminology. They agreed on several changes, including making hasNext optional and requiring pending to exist in initial incremental stream results. The group also reviewed and closed several issues in the GraphQL WG repository, including updates to TSC details and default value validation. They discussed potential improvements to the specification repository's formatting and agreed to keep an eye on the Golden Path project. The conversation ended with Rob updating his pull request based on the group's feedback and Benjie noting that he would continue reviewing the incremental delivery changes.

## Next Steps

- Rob: Update the PR with the agreed terminology changes (rename "initial execution result" to "initial incremental stream result", update "hasNext" and "pending" requirements, use "payload" instead of "value", and clarify definitions as discussed), and address Benjie's other review comments.
- Benjie: Complete detailed review of Rob's PR and provide final approval when ready.
- Martin: Ask Apollo Server team for confirmation on whether Apollo Server supports the new version of incremental delivery (DFAR) via GraphQLJS 17 Alpha 9 or later.
- Martin: Add the TSC voting process PR to the agenda for the next TSC meeting.
- Benjie: In next 1:1 with Jory, clarify what is required for governance/charter documentation for GraphQL over HTTP and other projects (gaps, Golden Path), and coordinate with Jory on next steps.
- Benjie: Add discussion of adopting the new community spec repository (gaps) to the next working group agenda.
- Benjie: Consider maintaining or forking Prettier to implement semantic line breaks for spec formatting, and ask Glenn if he is interested in helping with this.
- Rob: Ping Benjie for review status on the PR if needed.
- Rob: Once spec terminology is stable, update GraphQLJS type names to match (using type aliases and deprecating old names for future removal).

## Summary

### GraphQL Specification PR Review

The GraphQL specification working group meeting focused on reviewing a pull request for the integration branch, which defines foundational terms for the algorithm section. Rob presented the PR, highlighting the importance of the response section and noting that the spec changes for deferred streams are being reviewed incrementally. Martin and Benjie discussed the implementation status of the new version of incremental delivery, with Martin mentioning that Apollo Client 4 added options for different protocols. The group agreed to spend the next 10 minutes reviewing the PR individually before regrouping to discuss feedback.

### Execution Results Terminology Clarification

Benjie and Rob discussed terminology and definitions related to execution results, focusing on distinguishing between initial execution results and regular execution results. They agreed to use "initial incremental result" and "incremental update result" to avoid ambiguity. They also decided to allow "hasNext" to be false and changed "pending" to "must" in the specification. Rob explained his motivation for these changes, considering future flexibility and client compatibility.

### Terminology Updates for Streaming Data

Rob and Benjie discussed the use of the term "value" versus "payload" in the specification, with Benjie expressing a preference for "payload" due to its clearer meaning in the context of streaming data. They agreed that this was a topic better suited for discussion with Lee, who had previously expressed opposition to using "payload." Rob mentioned he would update some terminology in the specification, including changing "initial execution result" to "initial incremental stream results" and "execution update result" to "initial incremental stream update result," while also making "hasNext" optional and ensuring "pending" exists on the initial incremental stream results. Martin confirmed that these changes would not require updates to existing protocols, as the only breaking change was allowing "hasNext" to be false.

### GraphQL Specification Review Process

The team discussed ongoing work on GraphQL specifications and pull requests. Martin proposed reviewing issues and pull requests in both GraphQL WG and GraphQL spec, with a goal to close existing items and reactivate dormant contributors. Benjie explained that a pull request was not merged due to a bug in WG utils, and mentioned that a TSC discussion from a few years ago about formalizing voting processes still needs resolution. The team agreed to remove a "stale" label from an issue since nothing had changed to make it invalid.

### Pull Request and Issue Management

Benjie and Martin discussed the handling of pull requests and issues, focusing on merging and closing resolved items. They confirmed that certain pull requests related to default values and selection sets had been merged into GraphQLJS, with the spec version also being managed. Benjie suggested closing the relevant issues, and Martin agreed, noting that all necessary actions had been completed.

### GraphQL Deprecation Validation Discussion

The team discussed closing a merged pull request and debated changes to GraphQL's deprecation validation rules, with Benjie proposing a simpler approach where schemas without deprecated elements must still be valid. They also reviewed documentation requirements for GraphQL over HTTP, which Benjie and Martin determined needed to be updated, with Benjie planning to coordinate with Jory on the necessary changes.

### Project Updates and Prettier Plans

The team discussed several ongoing projects and issues. Benjie explained his plans to modify Prettier to implement semantic line breaks, as the current implementation causes re-wrapping issues. He is considering either maintaining a patched version or creating a fork of Prettier. The team also reviewed the status of the GraphQL specification repository and the Golden Pass initiative. They agreed to keep the Golden Pass issue open for awareness and to continue discussions in the relevant repository. The conversation ended with a review of progress, noting the closure of seven issues and the pinning of one important issue.

### GraphQL Specification Updates Discussion

The team discussed changes to the GraphQL specification, focusing on incremental stream updates and terminology. Rob made several improvements, including renaming objects and using "payload" instead of "value" for subscriptions. Benjie agreed these were positive changes and mentioned reviewing the documentation, though progress was delayed by a conference and the Golden Path project. They decided to use type aliases in GraphQLJS for non-breaking changes in version 17, with the old names deprecated for removal in GraphQL 18.
