# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2026-02-05T18:29:00Z
- Meeting end: 2026-02-05T19:51:50Z
- Summary start: 2026-02-05T18:29:00Z
- Summary end: 2026-02-05T19:49:24Z

The GraphQL Technical Steering Committee (TSC) meeting focused on several key topics including field extensions, fragment reusability, and AI working group updates. The group discussed a proposal for compile-only directives and runtime schemas, with Mark presenting ideas for distinguishing between human-readable schema files and actual runtime schemas. Lee emphasized the importance of separating runtime and compile-time concerns to improve tooling and resilience. The meeting also covered updates on the AI working group's progress with semantic introspection and subschema concepts, with Kewei presenting on these initiatives. Additionally, Martin reported that the nullability working group would be archiving their repository, as consensus had been reached on service capabilities and on-error request flags. The conversation ended with discussions about GraphQL Conference CFPs and upcoming working group sessions on incremental delivery and the Golden Path.

## Next Steps

- Emily: Discuss with Martine and consider feedback from the group about field extensions syntax/merge behavior, and determine next steps for the PR.
- All interested parties: Review and help with reviewing the incremental delivery pull request, especially at the upcoming secondary/overflow meeting.
- Lee: Merge the TSC document update pull request linked by Benjie.
- Lee: Merge the "fragments are not for reuse" PR and make minor copy edits as needed.
- Mark: Rework the mock proposal to support mocking parts of operations/fragments (not just whole operations) and publish the updated proposal in the gaps repository.
- Mark: Write up a proposal (spike) for "compile-only" (or equivalent) directives and related schema distinctions, incorporating group feedback on naming and approach.
- Benjie: Post the Golden Path working group details to the relevant GitHub issue and schedule the first meeting for next week.
- All interested parties: Attend the Golden Path working group meeting next week to kick off the process.
- All interested parties: Submit CFPs for GraphQLconf before the deadline.
- Lee: Archive the nullability working group repository.
- Kewei and Pascal: Iterate on semantic introspection and mock specs, aiming to have both specs and reference implementations ready for community review within 2 months.
- All interested parties: Attend the next AI working group meeting to continue discussion on semantic introspection, subschema, and mock proposals.
- Mark: Continue work on the pull request for the TSC document update.
- All interested parties: Review the TSC document update PR (linked by Benjie) and help get it merged.

## Summary

### GraphQLConf CFP Deadline Approaches

The meeting began with informal discussions about commuting and the arrival of AI tools, including Stephen's use of a bot to manage meeting attendees. Lee introduced the agenda and reminded participants of the meeting's guidelines, including the recording of sessions and the use of LLM tools for note summaries. The group discussed the upcoming GraphQLConf, with Benjie announcing the closure of the Call for Papers (CFP) on February 11th, and Lee encouraged everyone to submit their proposals. The conversation ended with Lee introducing the protocol for introductions, starting with himself, and preparing for the main discussion.

### GraphQL Foundation Meeting Updates

The meeting began with introductions and a busy agenda overview, including TSC election results, grant availability, incremental delivery, field extensions, and updates from the AI and nullability working groups. Lee announced the GraphQLconf CFP deadline and welcomed new TSC members Mark and Yaacov. Benjie discussed the grant program to support contributions to GraphQL Foundation projects and requested help reviewing pull requests for incremental delivery. Lee mentioned a pending pull request to update the GraphQL TSC document and encouraged its merge. Emily and Martine were set to discuss field extensions, but the transcript ended before they could present their update.

### Field Extension Merge Strategy Discussion

Emily presented updates on field extensions, proposing a new approach that merges extensions into type extensions rather than using schema coordinates. The team discussed the handling of descriptions and default values, agreeing that extensions should only merge if descriptions are identical. They also considered the implications of this approach for various use cases, including nullability and AI. Benjie raised concerns about the potential for conflicts when extending schemas in multiple places, and Lee suggested that the current syntax might be too complex. The team agreed to further discuss potential improvements to the syntax to avoid these issues.

### GraphQL Schema Modification Challenges

The team discussed the challenges and potential solutions for modifying field types in GraphQL schemas, with Pascal highlighting the need for a clear process to handle schema changes and collisions. Matt suggested developing a new SDL merge operation to address complex schema dependencies, while Lee emphasized the importance of solving the problem of annotating existing schemas with additional directives. The group agreed that this issue should be addressed as RFC1, acknowledging it as a significant problem in the GraphQL ecosystem.

### Syntax and GraphQL Terminology Updates

The team discussed extending syntax for gap features and agreed to use the existing extend syntax while acknowledging the need for new syntax in the future. Martin raised concerns about merging Janet's pull request regarding GraphQL component terminology, but Lee and the team decided to merge it and iterate on the draft text, with Lee offering to make minor copy edits. The team agreed that while the terminology could be improved, the core concept of UI as a hierarchical tree structure was valid and not specific to React.

### GraphQL and AI Integration Discussion

The AI working group discussed two main problems: helping AI agents write valid GraphQL fragments and operations, and using GraphQL on top of MCP for runtime data access. They reviewed proposals including semantic introspection and subschema concepts, with Michael and Pascal working on reducing latency in semantic introspection. Mark presented a new proposal for client-centric UI mocking, which aims to improve ergonomics by starting with UI and data needs rather than writing fragments first. The group agreed to iterate on both specs with reference implementations over the next two months, with Pascal noting that the two approaches may eventually merge. Lee announced the archiving of the nullability working group repository, which had been inactive for six months after reaching consensus on service capabilities and on-error request flags.

### GraphQL Schema Optimization Discussion

The meeting focused on discussing a proposal to reduce the overhead of applying interface fields to types in GraphQL schemas. Mark led the discussion, proposing the use of compile-only directives and a distinction between source schemas (written by humans) and runtime schemas (executed by the server). The group agreed that separating these concepts would be beneficial, with Lee suggesting that a subset of grammar for runtime schemas could be stable and resilient to changes. They also discussed the potential for caching source schemas and exposing them through introspection. The conversation ended with a reminder about upcoming deadlines for GraphQLConf CFPs and a mention of a golden path discussion scheduled for the following week.
