# Meeting Summary for Working Group Meeting

**NOTICE**: This summary was auto-generated by Zoom's "AI". AI-generated
content may be inaccurate or misleading. Always check for accuracy. If in
doubt, please consult the meeting recording at
https://youtube.com/@GraphQLFoundation/playlists

- Meeting start: 2026-01-15T18:28:50Z
- Meeting end: 2026-01-15T20:02:21Z
- Summary start: 2026-01-15T18:28:50Z
- Summary end: 2026-01-15T20:02:11Z

The meeting began with introductions and brief discussions before transitioning to announcements about upcoming GraphQLConf and TSC nominations. The TSC then discussed creating a community specs repository to host GraphQL specifications, with the group agreeing to move forward with the repository creation and exploring type composition proposals. The conversation ended with discussions about extending GraphQL's type system, schema construction practices, and the importance of providing clear documentation and examples for best practices.

## Next Steps

- Lee: Accept volunteers (especially for website DRI/content management) and follow up with interested parties for GraphQLConf organization.
- All interested participants: Submit nominations for TSC elections by the deadline (tomorrow as per meeting).
- Mark and Bjørn: Collaborate (in Discord and/or PR) to reframe and further develop the type composition proposal, focusing on schema construction vs. representation.
- NYC (Jeanette/Matt): Address any final editorial feedback on the fragment reuse PR and respond to comments for final merge.
- Benjie: Set up a recurring secondary working group meeting (every 2-3 weeks, same or different time zones) for focused PR reviews, especially for defer/stream updates.
- Benoit: Collect feedback on the directives-on-directives PR and continue implementation/testing, especially in GraphQLJS and related tooling (with support from NYC for relay compiler/tooling).
- All: Review and provide feedback on Benjie's service capabilities PR (syntax and implementation) before the next working group meeting.
- Benjie: Organize a group (including library/tooling/server/framework maintainers) to define and document the GraphQL Golden Path best practices/guidance.
- Michael: Consider and propose the idea of a "how to GraphQL" section on the GraphQL org site, with language-specific best practice guides (follow up as appropriate).
- All: Continue discussion on merging community specs and scalars repositories, and consider website organization improvements (as raised by Michael and Martin)—follow up in relevant issues/threads.
- All: Provide feedback on the type composition RFC, especially regarding construction vs. representation, in the PR and relevant issue threads.
- All: Review and comment on the directives-on-directives PR and related tooling PRs (including GraphQLJS, relay compiler, etc.).
- All: Review and comment on the service capabilities PR, especially regarding syntax and implementation, before next working group meeting.
- Benjie: Move the directives-on-directives PR to RFC1 status and monitor for consensus to move to RFC2.
- All: Consider and provide input on the GraphQL Golden Path initiative, including what should be default best practices for tooling and libraries.
- Benjie: Set up scheduling for the new recurring secondary working group meeting and communicate details to the group.

## Summary

### Pastrami on Rye Introduction Meeting

The meeting began with participants arriving and some mentioning they were finishing or had finished dinner. NYC and Jeanette introduced themselves as "Pastrami on Rye" and confirmed this was for the first show, which Michael and Martin acknowledged. The conversation was brief, with no significant decisions, alignments, or action items discussed.

### GraphQLConf and TSC Updates

Lee announced upcoming GraphQLConf in early May, sponsored by Meta, and encouraged participants to submit CFPs and volunteer for organizing roles, particularly for website content management. Lee also reminded the group that TSC nominations are open and elections will begin soon, urging anyone interested in joining the TSC to submit their nominations before the deadline. The conversation ended with Benjie taking over to discuss community specs.

### GraphQL Community Specs Repository

The TSC discussed creating a community specs repository to host GraphQL specifications outside the main spec repository. Benjie proposed this to centralize and maintain community specifications like the semantic non-null directive and at-matches directive. The group debated whether to have a single repository with subfolders or separate repositories, with Michael suggesting consolidation similar to the scalars repository. Pascal raised concerns about visibility and maintenance, while NYC highlighted the benefits of centralized ownership. The TSC agreed to move forward with creating the repository, with Mark suggesting numbered specifications similar to PEPs. The conversation ended with Bjørn presenting a proposal for type composition in GraphQL, which would allow for more dry and flexible data structures.

### GraphQL Type System Extension Proposals

The group discussed proposals for extending GraphQL's type system, particularly around inheritance and composition. Lee explained the historical reasoning behind the current design, emphasizing the priority given to schema readability for users over flexibility for schema authors. Bjørn shared a use case from digital health projects where repeated patterns across data structures could benefit from such extensions. The discussion explored potential solutions, including directives for pre-processing schemas and the possibility of introducing base types. Martin inquired about breaking changes, and Benjie confirmed that while tooling might need updates, it would not affect existing queries. Lee suggested reframing the proposal to distinguish between schema representation and schema construction, proposing a syntax for describing operations to produce schemas without changing the type system itself.

### GraphQL Schema Construction Discussion

The meeting focused on schema construction and editing in GraphQL. Lee and Bjorn discussed the distinction between constructing and representing schemas, with Lee suggesting that the scope of an RFC should be about constructing schemas rather than representing them. Pascal proposed creating a playground for experimenting with new syntax features, similar to TypeScript's relationship with JavaScript. Bjorn expressed interest but noted he might not be the best person to champion this effort forward. Mark offered to help reframe the proposal and suggested continuing the discussion on Discord. The conversation ended with Jeanette inquiring about the status of her PR related to fragment reuse, which Lee indicated was likely ready for final review and merge.

### GraphQL Best Practices and Standards

The meeting focused on several key topics related to GraphQL specifications and best practices. Martin and Michael discussed the potential for merging scalar efforts and agreed that a formal GraphQL namespace could be beneficial, though they emphasized the importance of allowing flexibility for community contributions. Lee suggested organizing the website by kind rather than contributor, and Benjie proposed a system where specs could link to each other to indicate equivalency or subsets, potentially allowing tooling to handle these relationships. Benoit presented a proposal for applying directives to directives, which would allow for deprecating directives, and the group agreed to move this to RFC1. Benjie also introduced the concept of a "golden path" initiative to make best practices the default experience for new GraphQL users, emphasizing the need for collaboration across libraries, frameworks, and tooling to achieve this. The conversation ended with a brief discussion on the importance of providing concrete examples and documentation to support these best practices.
