# GraphQL WG Notes - November 2024

**Watch the replays:**
[GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

Agenda:
[https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/11-Nov/07-wg-primary.md](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2024/11-Nov/07-wg-primary.md)

## Make reason non-nullable in @deprecated (@martinbonnin, 5 min)

- `@deprecated(reason: null)` doesn't make sense. Suggest we make it
  non-nullable, technically a breaking change.
- Consistently nullable in many places in the spec, and will need fixing in many
  places. Also mentions optionality in many places.
- > `deprecationReason` optionally provides a reason why this input field or
  > argument is deprecated.
- ^ This is made incorrect by this change, need to remove "optionally"

## Discuss enhancing deprecation (@gwardwell, 15 min)

- Proposing to overhaul deprecation, and figure out the correct approach.
- There are gaps in introspection:
  - Removing an interface or a type from a union: show that removing an inline
    fragment is deprecated and should go away
- Lee: conceptually anything in the schema should be able to be deprecated. We
  started with what we had and we've been moving slowly ahead from there.
  There's often complexities and edge cases that differ on a feature by feature
  basis.
- Kewei: deleting a type from a union would be breaking.
- Greg: deprecating the fact that type is a member of the union would give
  clients guidance to move away from using it so that ultimately the client can
  remove the field
- Kewei: but you can't change shipped clients.
- Greg: that shipped code should be replaced by new shipped code - unlocks new
  opportunity
- Lee: in line w/ how deprecation works today, Kewei this resonates - once
  binary is out in the world it can take a long time if a historical build
  contains getTheThing and you want to deprecate it - server can’t delete it,
  it’s breaking. If you break it, it’s deprecated. Can remove it from
  introspection
- If you deprecate it, it's a signal to clients that they should not use it any
  more.
- Deprecating a type in a union is a promise that the server will never ever
  return that type in the union ever again. You would not want the server to
  deprecate a union member but then actually return it.
- By extension: a union cannot deprecate all of its member types
- Cannot have an empty union - must be able to return something - prob a
  validation rule - at least one member of a union must not be deprecated. All
  kinds of fun things.
- Benjie: do it on a feature-by-feature basis
- Lee: not to scare you away from it, eat the elephant one bite at a time
- Greg: Easy slicing, server deprecation use case - tells people to stop using
  something w/in graph - stop returning scalars you want to go away - objects,
  same thing - stop contributing or extending them
- (i.e. this is a note to schema _designers_ not to schema _consumers_.)
- Should we slice them individually?
- Benjie: this seems like a note to schema authors, not necessarily consumers
- Greg: I’d expect IDEs to be able to make use of these. Could have client-side
  utility. But for scalar, there’s not a lot of client value there - but lots of
  value on the server
- Benjie: should probably be a different directive. Suggested `@discontinued` in
  chat - doesn’t necessarily mean “deprecated” from a client POV, just don’t add
  more on the server side
- Lee: why a separate directive? I might be confused there
- Benjie: thinking of a situation. Doesn’t make sense from a client POV for a
  scalar to be deprecated on the client, not going to change anything, may not
  necessarily be your intent to hide them from clients
- Jeff: client-side schema extensions may be a potential overlap here
- Lee: could have a validation rule to prevent deprecated objects/entities from
  being included in non-deprecated objects/entities
- Stephen: …
- Lee: deprecate vs intend to deprecate?
- Calvin: Having to read notes in a schema to see if something is discontinued
  is one thing - how do we take that to clients in the IDE environment?
- Benjie: intent would be to the SDL use case - no autocompletes, for example
- Greg: at Wayfair we have a lot of subgraphs (governance?)
- Benjie: if you deprecate a scalar, it’s kind of meaningless to the client
- Lee: could be a tooling solution
- Benjie: (...) (expresses some nuance)
- Greg: with the new federation spec - entering into a new “contract” with how
  the graph operates. Being able to communicate the state of schemas in a
  distributed manner. Could be a distributed spec
- Lee: a few paths -
- Lee: using comment blocks? Descriptions? It’s a bit hacky but it’s a great
  experimentation ground.
- Greg: maybe a doc style
- Lee: #300 is probably the ultimate solution but there’s value in this proposal
  as well
- From chat:
  - Benjie: It's spec issue #300 again (metadata)
  - Jeff: Yeah there could be a tooling solution here, maybe using comment
    blocks, at least as a first step. We might learn enough to help drive
    forward the case for a spec addition? Idk
  - Benjie: Basically: it should be in the SDL that you can produce from
    introspection. I think advancing #300 and then standardizing some common
    directives (a little like the GraphQL scalars project) would work well.
  - One of GraphQL's greatest values is sharing rules across the ecosystem so
    that standardized tooling can leverage them :)
  - In `gqlcheck` we keep a "baseline" of what was in place when the rule was
    initialized so that all those instances are allow-listed but no more can be
    introduced. https://github.com/graphile/gqlcheck
  - `@deprecated` side-steps this need by ensuring that everything is
    @deprecated all the way up, but this new directive would be the inverse and
    wouldn't have that.

Incremental Delivery update (@rob, 15 min)

- Rob: it’s implemented in graphql-js for a while
- Made an integration branch w a subset of changes
- We can focus on one area at a time, month by month get through the whole thing
- Looks like a lot of changes, there are a few changes
- List of a few examples for review. Get eyes on it
- graphql-spec#300
- Lee: reminds me of the old compliance tests (codified version of that
  appendix)
- Given this query, you get this sequence of responses. Big fan of the idea of
  an appendix
- Massive change, lots of work and edge cases. Balance between legibility and
  readability
- Could be technically correct but also prone to misinterpretation. Examples are
  extremely valuable to that end
- In lieu of a compliance test framework, this could be super valuable
- Please read! :)

Nullability update (Alex, 15 min)

- We ran a poll and chose the `?` for optionals, nothing for semantically
  non-nullable, and `!` for (strict) non-null
- Currently working on an implementation
- There's a pair of blog posts that need a bit of tweaking before the go out
  - [https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/pull/1775/files](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/pull/1775/files)
  - [https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/blob/1c8731cf347be2fd4ac484104622a01001c48208/src/pages/blog/2024-08-14-exploring-true-nullability.mdx](https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/blob/1c8731cf347be2fd4ac484104622a01001c48208/src/pages/blog/2024-08-14-exploring-true-nullability.mdx)
- Benjie's post was for developers of clients like Relay, etc
  - https://github.com/graphql/graphql.github.io/pull/1731
- Alex's for end users
- Once the implementation is done, will be working on spec edits to go along
  with that
- I think we’re pretty well aligned on the details at this point
- Lee: backstory on syntax? Been a debate
- Alex: ran a poll w/ three options (nullable, semantically non-null, non-null)
  - `Foo`, `Foo!`, `Foo!!`
  - `Foo?`, `Foo`, `Foo!`
  - `Foo`, `Foo*`, `Foo!`
- Benjie: what does it mean for people writing queries? Do we need a document
  directive in the executable documents?
- Lee: I have a hunch that the cost of changing the executable document is
  higher. Being cautious about how we introduce this feels like the good thing
  to do.
- Benjie: please test the functionality. It’s all in Relay, some Apollo tools,
  and other places.
- Alex: we also have other tools such as toe and sock!
- Benjie: more tools to play with so you can experience all this cool stuff
  today!

## Directive Meta-Field Proposal (@yaacovCR, 5 min)

- Yaacov: this is not a huge proposal
- Yaacov: This is a new meta field to know about a single directive without
  getting all of them
- Lee: **type(name: String) should have been **Schema.type(name: String)
- Lee: we could deprecated the top level \_\_type
- Only 2 places with **: **typename and \_\_Schema
- There are many places where we need to set includeDeprecated. We could to
  \_\_schema(includeDeprecated: true)
- Right now it’s possible to have an inconsistent schema by passing different
  includeDeprecated values
- Yaacov: I can tackle pieces of it bit by bit
- Benjie: We have similar need for semantic nullability (though currently doing
  it on the `__Field.type` field is sufficient.
- Lee: We could have \_\_Schema.sdl
- Benjie: but what version of GraphQL we use for for that SDL?

(Yaacov: last topic is the most interesting one, as we do not have a lot of
time, we’ll probably skip it)

## Subscriptions and Source Event Stream Errors (@yaacovCR, 15m)

- Yaacov: The state of the reference implementation is if the server can’t have
  the iterartor, graphql-js will raise a nicely formatted request error.
- We still have an interesting case if there is an error when trying to get a
  value => graphql-js just throws here.
- The spec says something like “it should return an error” without much
  precision.
- In JS you can always catch the error but we got requests to handle this
  differently
- If the source stream throws, does “complete with an error” mean graphql-js
  throws at well?
- Lee: graphqls-js should only throw if you would return 500. GraphQL-js does
  not throw on field error
- From chat: Benjie `subscribe()` should return `Promise&lt;{ errors: [...] }>`
  not throw
- Lee: I think my rewrite takes care of that case. Grab the error and expose it
  as a GraphQL error
- Benjie: Could be bug in
  [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/streams-editorial/spec/Section%206%20--%20Execution.md#subscription](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/streams-editorial/spec/Section%206%20--%20Execution.md#subscription)
- Lee: the intent is for that mapSourceToEven be a response stream that never
  ends in failure. Only event and completes.
- The source stream can error but the map function accounts for that … well,
  actually maybe not. There might be a more substantial change to do there.
- Yaacov: the spec as it is now does not prohibit changing that
- Benjie: `Complete {responseStream} with {error}.` should maybe be
  `Complete {responseStream} with a response object containing `errors:
  [{error}].`
- Yaacov basically, it depends on how graphql-ws (or similar) would handle it =>
  @enisdenjo suggested that we handle it within graphql-js
