# GraphQL WG Meeting #1 Notes (August 14, 2017)

## Attendees

Name          | Organization  | Location
------------- | ------------- | -------------
Lee Byron     | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Greg Hurrell  | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Angel Gomez   | Facebook      | Menlo Park, CA
Johannes Schickling  | Graphcool      | Berlin, Germany
Ivan Goncharov| APIs.guru     | Lviv, Ukraine
Sashko Stubailo  | Apollo   | San Francisco, CA
Oleg Ilyenko  | Sangria | Berlin, Germany
Andi Marek    | graphql-java | Germany
Robert Zhu    | Facebook      | Boston, MA
Tim Ryan      | Facebook      | Boston, MA
James Baxley  | Apollo | Anderson, SC
Dan Schafer  | Facebook | Menlo Park, CA
Martijn Walraven | Apollo | Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Ian MacLeod   | Convoy        | Seattle, WA
Robert Mosolgo   | graphql-ruby | Charlottesville, VA
Thea Lamkin   | Apollo        | San Fancisco, CA 

## Agenda

### Discuss upcoming meeting schedule
* Johannes mentioned that it would be nice to have a time shift for the next meeting because he's going to Australia. 
### [GCL: GraphQL Configuration Language](https://github.com/graphcool/gcl)
* Johannes presented a proposal for a common GraphQL Configuration Language
(GCL).
* GCL is intended to be a type-safe alternative to JSON, YAML, etc. based on the input type syntax of GraphQL
* It uses the .gcl extension.
* Advantages of utilizing GCL are that it would use a common language and could therefore piggyback off of existing GraphQL tooling and provide a better developer experience. 
* An example of this configuration file set up as a DSL for Docker images is included on the graphcool github (Docker configs are only one of the several use cases for this). 
* Johannes would ideally work with Hyo from the GraphQL core team on getting this supported in existing tooling. 
* A few concerns that were brought up are:
  * How would this handle scenarios where there is more than one type of configuration?
  * This seems like it has a lot of overlap with other sorts of configuration languages.
* The general consensus was that since this is not encumbering the language in anyway and brings something of value more exploration should be done such as for a Docker compose file or a VM deploy to Digital Ocean, etc. 
### [Status Update on Subscriptions error-handling](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/918)
* There should be a way to allow callers to distinguish between initialization and publish errors when calling subscribe.
* The proposed behavior is the following: 
  * If the operation is successful, return an AsyncIterator representing the response stream.
  * If the operation failed with an informative error for the client, return an ExecutionResult with an errors field but no value field.
  * If the operation failed due to a system related problem, such as an unavailable pubsub, system, an error will be thrown.
* This change would make the reference implementation match the spec more closely.
* The PR for this proposal has since been merged into graphql-js
### ["Verbatim string" literals and schema descriptions](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/926)
* Proposal adds a new lexed token, a long form text or verbatim string, similar to that found in Python and Scala.
* A multiline string would start and end with triple quotes.
* Especially useful for example for people wanting to comment schema definition files by hand.
* The proposal mentioned using """ to enclose these verbatim strings,
* Quote literals become part of the spec so they should be included when parsed into ASTs vs comments which are usually stripped. 
* The general consensus was that minimum common shared indentation should be stripped as to make reading and writing as simple as possible.
* Verbatim strings should have as few escape sequences as possible to avoid surprises.
* Special care needs to be taken so as not to break existing 
### [Standardizing unique IDs in the spec/tooling](https://github.com/facebook/graphql/pull/232)
* GraphQL currently doesn't have a standard way to implement unique identifiers.
* Not having this currently impairs the ability to create tooling that processes results without involving configuration for how people use IDs.
* It would provide a standard way to handle things such as cache invalidation.
* Should probably be nullable since it is not always going to be provided. 
* There should ideally be a way to specify in what context the ID is unique.
* This should be done in a way that is as non breaking as possible and doesn't require people to change their current setup.
* Ideally it would leverage type ID.
* It was mostly agreed that this would be valuable and followup for this would be to resurrect Sashko's stale PR and follow up discussion there.
### [Define process for the changes to the specification](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/9)
* As of now there's no clearly defined process that indicates what stages PR's are at leading to confusion.
* Sometimes the authors of PR's don't get a clear picture of what's blocking their acceptance or what the followup should be: Is it ready to be merged into the spec? Is it safe to start adding this proposed functionality to tools? Should I expect major changes to this PR? Is this important to GraphQL?
* It was proposed that there should be a stage setup similar to the one in TC39 (Proposal/Champion/Stage)
* Explore the possibility of having a bot that automatically pings key stakeholders if a proposal isn't commented in a certain amount of days.
* There was a general consensus that this would be something valuable to add with the following observations:
	*	Make the stages a general criteria instead of a set of fixed rules.
	* Have a predictable timeline of when things are going to be merged so that stakeholders and users are aware. 
	* Explicitly alert everybody of when proposals are going to be merged into the spec.
### GraphQL Configuration for cross-tool usage.
* Discussed how we could lower the barrier of entry for people attempting to build gateway services allowing for some sort of schema federation. 
### Meta: How has this meeting worked today?
* It is good to have a set of defined goals for each agenda item.
* Opening PRs and issues is a good place to have followup discussions to things talked about in the meetings.
