# GraphQL WG Notes - January 2022

**Watch the replay:** [GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

## Agenda

1. Agree to Membership Agreement, Participation & Contribution Guidelines and Code of Conduct (1m, Lee)
   1. [Specification Membership Agreement](https://github.com/graphql/foundation)
   2. [Participation Guidelines](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg#participation-guidelines)
   3. [Contribution Guide](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
   4. [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/graphql/foundation/blob/master/CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
2. Introduction of attendees (5m, Lee)
3. Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
4. Review agenda (2m, Lee)
5. Review previous meeting's action items (1m, Lee) 5. [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc) 6. [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc) 7. [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)
6. **TSC**: Define a process for reporting/dealing with security vulnerabilities (Benjie, 10m) 8. [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/825)
7. Fragment Modularity: Call for contributors (5m, Matt Mahoney) 9. Related to Client Controlled Nullability 10. [RFC: Exploration of Problem/Solution Space](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/839)
8. Formatting the spec with Prettier (5m, Benjie) 11. After much work [the PR is ready to merge](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/727) and instructions are included to see that it does not modify the generated HTML.
9. Normative force of directives (10m, Yaacov) 12. [Spec clarification PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/908)
10. Advancing Default Value Validation/Coercion (10m, Benjie) 13. [Spec RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793) 14. [GraphQL.js PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3049)
11. Named Lists (10m, Davit): 15. [Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/914)
12. Update on Client Controlled Nullability (10m, Alex Reilly) 16. [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/895) 17. How are decisions typically made when there isn't consensus?
13. Allow specifying directives on directives (10m, Ivan) 18. [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/907)
14. Deprecation of input values (20m, Stephen) 19. [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/805) 20. [PR to disallow deprecation of required args](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/917) 21. [Previous discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vw5zEOHVPBtspoWRVQ279NSo_JfWg7ZEdGKix4O-nco/edit#heading=h.w19vr9farz2x)
15. Update on @defer & @stream (20m, Rob Richard) 22. [Enforcing delivery order of payloads](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/17) 23. [Mutation execution order](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/1) 24. [Non-nullable field errors](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/23)

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie
- Stephen

## Review agenda (2m, Lee)

- Hot off the presses the 5 TSC members that just got seats are this year are:
  - Benjie Gillam
  - Ivan Goncharov
  - Marc-Andre Giroux
  - Matt Mahoney
  - Michael Staib

## Review previous meeting's action items (1m, Lee)

- [Ready for review](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Ready+for+review+%F0%9F%99%8C%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by last update)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- [All open action items (by meeting)](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/projects?query=is%3Aopen+sort%3Aname-asc)

## TSC: Define a process for reporting/dealing with security vulnerabilities (Benjie, 10m)

- [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues/825)
- Benjie: Don’t seem to have a good process for porting/discussing vulns, at least can’t find it (even as TSC member)
- Benjie: Is there precedent for any issues and/if how have we handled them?
- Lee: ?? with GraphiQL
- Benjie: We should have a link on the org that describes the process for how to report issues. There needs to be a place for reporters to reach out to TSC members.
- Lee: Ask Brian to setup an email alias (something like [security@graphql.org](mailto:security@graphql.org)) to reach out to TSC members
- Eloy: bare minimum is the email alias. GitHub also has infrastructure for this (https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/security/policy )

## Fragment Modularity: Call for contributors (5m, Matt Mahoney)

- Related to Client Controlled Nullability
- [RFC: Exploration of Problem/Solution Space](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/pull/839)
- Matt: this is a call for volunteers for people who are interested. Before we dive into discussion, we should have some editing clarification.
- In short: multiple GraphQL implementations have found one of the common issues is a fragment is a "facade" - it acts like copy paste, as opposed to it's own independent thing. There's not a way to "decompose" the response into individual fragments unless you know everything about the request up front.
- I've added an RFC to explore this idea. "We" (Matt, Joseph, Jordan) have had a bit of a think, but it touches Client Controlled Nullability and other areas. What's the right response format? Right syntax? Can we do it with existing spec? We want to explore and iterate quickly. If you're interested ping Matt on Discord or comment on the RFC.
- Lee: thanks for documenting this. Excited we're coming back to this. Joe and me talked about this about 5 years ago.
- Joe: it touches on so many important aspects of the design, so it's important to talk about.
- Lee: I took a quick read of the solutions space. Syntax might expand beyond fragments themselves.
- Matt: to discuss, do it on the PR commit that's closed, I'll figure out a better process.
- Lee: we have a new feature called "discussions" in the GitHub repo - so open a discussion and it has one extra level of nesting compared to issues
- Alex: the threading is really really nice.
- &lt;Banter>

## Formatting the spec with Prettier (5m, Benjie)

- After much work [the PR is ready to merge](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/727) and instructions are included to see that it does not modify the generated HTML.
- Benjie: We are ready to merge, would appreciate other people checking it once more. Output before and after should match, except for links to source.
- Lee: Heck yeah!
- Lee: I’m hitting the button right now &lt;to merge the PR>
- Ivan: Code samples?
- Benjie: Doesn’t impact code samples
- Ivan: Can ask to name code samples so that we have stable links
- Lee: There’s fewer reasons now for things to change out from under us
- Ivan: This is an additional idea for someone who wants to contribute
- Matt: To clarify - we want links to remain stable even when e.g. a paragraph is added
- Lee: That should generally be the case today, but Ivan is suggesting nominal markers
- Lee: Merged

## Normative force of directives (10m, Yaacov)

- [Spec clarification PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/908)
- Yaacov: relevant to defer/stream directives - what should their normative force be? Might be confusing to newcomers that directives in general _could_ have different normative forces: MUST vs SHOULD. How strong do directives direct things?
- The idea of this PR is to clarify the current state of things and to give us future flexibility.
- Lee: I've commented on the PR. If a directive is defined by the spec then it's normative (it's not extra information) - @deprecated, @skip and @include all have MUST language.
- Lee: For custom directives, what you're getting at is right, from the spec's POV it's just annotated annotation, but some other spec may have a normative understanding of this. For @defer/@stream they should be in the spec so they must be normative.
- Yaacov: the @defer/@stream are should right now.
- Benjie: I think the "should" existing _within_ the @defer/@stream rather than as to whether the directive is honoured or not. Like with @skip if you have @skip(if: false) then the field isn't skipped an no change is made, but it's still honoured.
- Lee: clarity is always good so thanks for raising this!
- Ivan: when proxies are involved it's not clear what should happen with directives.
- Rob: introspection is the way that the client supports defer/stream. If the schema supports it, the proxy shouldn't buffer everything and send it in one response.
- Ivan: once it's in the spec, we cannot remove it - so be super careful not to trigger this case of exposing directives without understanding them.
- Yaacov: Rob was talking about a proxy seeing defer/stream but not passing them along; you're talking about the opposite where the proxy doesn't support them so cannot pass them along. Proxies should not expose directives they don't understand.
- Ivan: I think many of the tools just re-expose what the underlying schema supports.
- Lee: suffice to say there's room for us to clarify what to do with directives at this layer.
- Daviti: I wrote GraphQL in Haskell, it's hard for directives to be correct in the type system because they're "too powerful" - does it affect only validation? schema? resolvers? It might be beneficial if we were to add more limitations.
- Lee: this has been discussed before, we generally agree that we should restrict what directives should do over time, but we've failed to find the boundary. It's interesting and cool that directives can be used to do interesting things and explore new ideas. Directives can be metadata - the tool can interpret it and do something: change a type, change the response, etc. Everyone agrees there's abuses of this, no-one expects every tool to accept all variations.

## Advancing Default Value Validation/Coercion (10m, Benjie)

- [Spec RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793)
- [GraphQL.js PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/3049)
- Benjie: Lee raised series of graphql-js PRs, in September Lee asked for implementers to get at issues. No issues been raise?
- Lee: Have not heard issues. Right now, there’s a possibility that you can inject a null where a service doesn’t expect it, which fits into Security Vulnerability possibility from above
- Lee: Reason we paused: in flight TS migration, since passed (need to rebase commits)
- Lee: Other reason: waiting for input due to a few concerns. Asked for feedback and waited, done that.
- Lee: For people new to topic: well worth reading backstory
- Benjie: As update, tried to rewrite graphql-js into spec text, as Lee took slightly different approach. Action Item: look through spec text, make sure it matches graphql-js
- Lee: Sense is we’re close, just need to re-review work

## Named Lists (10m, Davit):

- [Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/914)
- Daviti: I'm proposing a new feature "named lists". In most languages you have some kind of list with a constraint: "non empty" or "has some specific length". We don't signal this to the client in GraphQL currently, so we're losing some of the type safety of Haskell. List has introspection but doesn't have name... we could add a name to the list.
- &lt;Screen sharing>
- Michael: so you want to add semantics?
- Daviti: yes, in a backwards compatible way, so clients aware of the new syntax can get more information about these constraints.
- Lee: interesting idea. Not the first time we've suggested some kind of generics syntax. My concern is having a type system that supports generics throughout can be quite hard, complex, and easy to make mistakes. Frequent cases for generics: Map type (keys, values) `Map&lt;K, V>`. Connections (Relay stuff) - `Connection&lt;Pages>` or similar. Those don't just desugar into lists with metadata. Does this preclude us from exploring this space in future?
- Daviti: tuples are problematic with typing - unclear how to name it.
- Michael: you're introducing new syntax, but to get semantic lists, semantics could be added with a directive.
- Daviti: directives aren't exposed via introspection
- Michael: if we add a spec directive we can expose it, e.g. @deprecated is exposed through introspection.
- Lee: the tricky part with directives is there's not any "position" where you put this. Consider nested named lists - where would the directive go?
- Michael: ah yes, doesn't work for multiple levels.
- Lee: worth exploring. We can bikeshed on syntax and get a better understanding of the ramifications of the syntax. Another good idea is to look at the discussion around custom scalars (there was a lot of work involved to make it so that tools know what to do with them; e.g. @specifiedBy). You probably want something like this. I'd also like to see more of the motivations behind this - is it a broad or niche problem? When will people need to use this?
- Daviti: I received PRs in my OSS repo, and started exploring these ideas. I don't know if it's common or not in other languages; but I don't think it adds too much complexity to the language so it could be a useful feature.
- Lee: I think that's generally right, but we have a high bar for adding features to the spec because it takes a lot of effort to support even small changes throughout the GraphQL ecosystem. Also fewer concepts is better, because it makes learning easier - we don't want a long tail of advanced features that only power users use. It's not surprising that you're coming from Haskell where types are the first level. That's not surprising that GraphQL's type system is simpler - that's by design. You should explore the problem a little more.
- Daviti: homogenous tuples e.g. x,y,z etc. Maybe we should have a survey to see how they'd be used.
- Lee: opening a discussion is a good idea, collecting use cases, etc. What are all the way in which we want to expand the type system and which of these does this solve. We'd rather have fewer and powerful tools in the toolbox rather than lots of tools.
- Joe: Maps and Sets are interesting because they may be associated with syntactic features - "is this key in that map" - or "fetch this key of that value" - it goes beyond the type system supporting them, but adds more features.
- Stephen: A side benefit is that this would also allow adding directives to nested lists
- Matt: Facebook (Relay) - client interacts with connection as a "special list type" rather than as a connection directly. We have ways where client operates on "generic" types, we already have workarounds. If we can collapse all or most of the generic workarounds into a single spec compliant solution that'd be really really cool.

## Update on Client Controlled Nullability (10m, Alex Reilly)

- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/895)
- How are decisions typically made when there isn't consensus?
- [20:06]
- Alex: discussion has continued about list nullability (what to do with `?` - catching nulls? error catching?). There's been some very recent feedback that I've not addressed yet, but at the moment I'm blocked on how to release this within GraphQL.js so that we can experiment with it.
- Michael: it's available in .NET now; if you want to play with it from the client side I can set up a server for you. We're working on the language server so that we can play with it in GraphiQL, and next week we should have the syntax in.
- Alex: great; we can talk more about that.
- For list nullability syntax it seems to come down to a matter of taste. I don't really want to make a unilateral decision on the list syntax. How are decisions made when there isn't consensus? Vote?
- Lee: if we have to we'll do a TSC vote. It's a bit unprecedented though - generally if we don't reach consensus then we just do nothing, which means we don't put controversial things in the spec. I agree a lot comes down to taste.
- We've been exploring this in abstract a lot... But what does it look like for a real query? Is that confusing or helpful. Lets pull it back to practicality if we can.
- Benjie: do we know of any GraphQL schemas that have doubly nested lists?
- Michael: you run into that with Geo types. Most I've ever seen is three nestings.
- Lee: it has to be log(100) the number of doubly nested lists to lists. The most important is the ability to say "I understand the difference between changing the nullability of the thing inside the list vs the list itself". It doesn't have to be beautiful for multiply nested lists because it's super uncommon.
- Joe: Relay doesn't support nested lists at all and it's never been a problem.
- Ivan: e.g. input unions there was a big disagreement for a long time. If it's hard to resolve there's two solutions - separate discussion for that. I don't think this is as big an issue as input unions. If we do square braces, maybe we can allow directives to be applied in more locations. `!` could be a directive; but we can't apply it deeper; but if you have `fieldName [[[]]]` then you could add directives inside the square braces.
- Alex: cool idea.
- Lee: open some GitHub discussions around the remaining open issues around this. If you're blocked on other things, open a thread on each thing that's uncertain. Secondly, make sure the syntax is right. Finally, the Relay team (and Joe in particular) are giving feedback on semantics - these all feel interrelated to me. Our goal here is to balance between providing neutral semantics that work for lots of use cases whilst also supporting the main clients people use Relay and Apollo Client. We owe exploring that space more clearly. Discussion around throwing and catching errors will be useful.
- Alex: the single threaded thing is becoming unwieldy, so discussions should help.
- Lee: this is one of the proposals I'm most excited about.
- Joe: this is really tugging at a loose thread in the design of GraphQL; we all want the end product of this, but we might need to work through a number of things to really get that right - but if we do this then GraphQL will be so much better - I'm excited about this!
- Alex: we should talk more in the PR, but do you feel this whole chain of issues need to be solved inward, or is client controlled nullability untenable untilt he fragments issue is addressed.
- Joe: I don't know. We need to work through - I'm worried about them passing through fragment boundaries; if we can avoid that then we don't need to solve the other problems.
- Lee: I'd like to avoid a state where we have to solve all of these in order; we've taken a few cracks at it but it's going to take a while before we finally figure it out and not being able to do downstream things because we're waiting on this should be avoided. We want to understand enough of the design space of those problems so that we can be confident working in this space. Can we end up with something that syntactically and semantically solves this without blocking solutions to other problems. Hopefully we can solve these things in parallel - maybe the syntax gets consumed by Relay, but they parse it and do something unique with it like with @required.

## Allow specifying directives on directives (10m, Ivan)

- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/907)
- [20:25]
- Ivan: I opposed this for a long time, but two things happened:
  - the spec started relying on directives more and more - `@specifiedBy`, `@deprecated`
- directives seem a way forward
- But you cannot deprecate a directive.
- In Apollo Federation and other use cases there's a mechanism to attach a URL to directives (similar to `@specifiedBy`) - would be cool to add a way to add `@specifiedBy` to directives. It's a bigger issue though.
- We've created new mechanisms that aren't applicable to directives.
- Directives can be used in queries (operation documents) and the SDL. Validating within queries is easy because everything's known already (types etc).
- Validating inside SDL is much harder because people are defining directives and using them in the same file.
- After re-reading the spec I discovered we already paid the price - validation section says because arguments are the same in directives and fields we already have a rule that prevents recursion. The validation is not implemented in GraphQL.js. My plan to move it forward is to implement this validation we already have in the spec, merge it, and have PR that allows directives on directives to enable this use case.
- Two things: validation rule (already paid the price), and syntax is kind of weird because the `@` symbol is used twice. The least confusing place to put the directives is after the list of locations. It's similar to what we do with scalars.
- Before I invest more time into spec PR I want to gather a general opinion on directives on directives. Should we allow it?
- Daviti: are we talking about higher order directives?
- Matt: this isn't for executable definitions, it's for type system definitions - directives on directive definitions.
- Daviti: it won't be used in queries?
- Ivan: it will not be used in queries. One good example is deprecating a directive - you expose it to clients.
- Matt: wanting to deprecate directives is highly motivating - we want to clear out a lot of directives that people keep using because they don't know they're not supposed to.
- Lee: agree, makes sense to expand deprecation here. One reason we didn't allow this was to avoid the recursion problem, but we've got this now anyway. Our validation of queries (operations :) ) has always been very good, but validation for schemas has always been playing catch up and this is one that hasn't been implemented yet.
- Lee: I want to know how easy this is to implement, I hope it's simple.
- Lee: the larger motivation to not have this is that directives on directives looks confusing syntax-wise. Maybe wanting to deprecate them is enough to push past that, but this is at least some historical context as to why we didn't add this. I'm not necessarily opposed, we just need to get the details right.
- Ivan: I expect the changes to be big but reasonable to add the validation, and then tiny to allow the directives on directives.
- Matt: one point on location: for union type definitions they have a similar syntax with the `|` to separate types in the same way that directives uses it to separate locations; union adds the directive right after the name - figuring out if it should go there or at the end is a question we should work through.
- Ivan: arguments are optional, and `@foo @bar(...)` might be confusing.
- Lee: I only want to add more punctuation if it's solving a language ambiguity problem; if we need to have more syntax we've probably already failed.
- Laurin: is this a use case in general or just specifically the deprecated example. E.g. you could do it as a comment in the documentation string like in JSDoc.
  - [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/907#issuecomment-1006928261](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/907#issuecomment-1006928261)
- Matt: that wouldn't be that big a breaking change, we already have repeatable, so adding deprecated after repeatable as an option we could make deprecated a more first case thing potentially.
- Ivan: my primary motivation was `@specifiedBy`; I just used `@deprecated` as a banner because it's more widespread. Without directive on directives we can't start the conversation of `@specifiedBy` on directives. We have two use cases, I expect in a year there'll be need for another directive on them.
- Ivan: can I move this to stage 1 to start working on PR and full procedure.
- Lee: anyone want to not move it to stage 1? Okay, stage 1 it is.
- Lee: plenty of open questions, please go and take a look at the thread if you're interested. Thanks Ivan.

## Update on @defer & @stream (~~20m~~ 10m, Rob Richard)

- [Enforcing delivery order of payloads](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/17)
- [Mutation execution order](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/1)
- [Non-nullable field errors](https://github.com/robrichard/defer-stream-wg/discussions/23)
- [20:44]
- Rob: just doing one bullet point.
- &lt;Sharing screen>
- When you have multiple mutations in the same operation, how does @defer work.
- Resolved: no @defer at the root level.
- Otherwise: are we okay with deferred fields on the payload resolving _after_ a second mutation resolves?
- Lee: the vast majority favour a single mutation per query [request]. So even option 1 would be reasonable. I think option 2 is the right direction.
- ***
- ACTION - everyone - Please look at the non-nullable fields discussion #23 so we can discuss it at the next WG. (And also look at all the other discussions.)

## Deprecation of input values (~~20m~~ 10m, Stephen)

- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/805)
- [PR to disallow deprecation of required args](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/917)
- [Previous discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vw5zEOHVPBtspoWRVQ279NSo_JfWg7ZEdGKix4O-nco/edit#heading=h.w19vr9farz2x)
- [20:49]
- Stephen: goal is to get concrete action items to jump this to stage 3.
- First class support for deprecation is critical for GraphQL, but currently it doesn't support deprecated to input values and arguments.
- GraphQL.js and GraphQL Java have implemented this.
- The main question: is it permitted to mark required fields (non-null without a default value) as deprecated.
- We should at least discourage it... but is it a MUST or a SHOULD?
- GraphQL spec recommends hiding things that are deprecated, but hiding a field that's required would be confusing.
- Relaxing from MUST to SHOULD later would be a non-breaking change later.
- Should we move forward with MUST?
- What's lacking to get us to stage 3.
- [Benjie - chat] +1 for MUST
- Lee: were there other issues around this?
- [Ivan - chat]
  - https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/blame/main/src/type/validate.ts#L191-L195
  - It's implemented for graphql-js for 16month
  - and no one objected
- Lee: to summarise: we've merged this behaviour into the reference implementation - you can add it to an argument, and if you add it to an argument that's required you'll get a validation error.
- Ivan: yes. One asterisk: GraphiQL only enforced this restriction for a couple months.
- Stephen: and deprecated input values are not included in introspection by default
- Lee: the behaviour we have seems like the right one - if you don't use `includeDeprecated` in your introspection query then you should get back something sensible.
- Next steps to get to stage 3
  - A: double check the reference implementation. Pull links to the unit tests that match the spec text - aids with review.
  - B: get the spec text in a final form for editorial review. Your PR is about merging a change into another PR - we should just add that in now so that we have a single source of truth for that.
- Stephen: cool, merge the PR on the PR and then Ivan can you help me with the links to the unit tests?
- Ivan: yes; and I'm behind on my GitHub Notifications Inbox so if you need something ping me on Slack or Twitter.
