# GraphQL WG Notes - May 2021

**Watch the replay:** [GraphQL Working Group Meetings on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLP1igyLx8foH30_sDnEZnxV_8pYW3SDtb)

## Agenda

1. Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)
2. Review agenda (2m, Lee)
3. Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)
   - [All action items](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
4. Release plan for next version of GraphQL specification (10m, Lee)
5. `graphql-js`: [Status update on the Typescript migration](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/issues/2860) and temporary feature freeze on unrelated changes (5m, Ivan, Uri)
6. [Default Value Coercion RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793) (5m, Evan)
   - [Ticket](https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/issues/3248) and [Draft PR](https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/pull/3448) of a failed ruby implementation
7. Full unicode support (15m, Lee, Andi)
   - [Original RFC Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/687)
   - [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/849)
   - [Pending Implementation PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/2449)
8. [Glossary RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/846) (10m, Benjie)
9. [Query Level Nullability RFC Draft](https://github.com/twof/graphql-spec/pull/1) / [Strawman](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/867) (15m, Alex Reilly, Stephen Spalding)
10. [Fragment Arguments RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/865) (15m, Matt Mahoney)
    - Overview of the problem and [Relay's current solution](https://relay.dev/docs/api-reference/graphql-and-directives/#arguments)
    - When to dig deeper into the solution: propose [June WG meeting](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/blob/main/agendas/2021-06-03.md)
11. [Advancing \_\_typename not valid at subscription root RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/776) (15m, Benjie)
    - Ivan approved [the GraphQL.js changes](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/2861)
    - Have since updated the implementation to more closely mirror the spec.
    - Potential validation oversight - @skip/@include; see related RFC: [graphql/graphql-spec/pull/860](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/860)
    - Question: have other implementors had a chance to look at this yet?

## Determine volunteers for note taking (1m, Lee)

- Benjie
- Evan

## Review previous meeting's action items (5m, Lee)

- [All action items](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Action+item+%3Aclapper%3A%22+sort%3Aupdated-desc)
- 8 Ready for review
- Old calendar deleted.
- Oneof - everyone who's going to give feedback has. Evan's planning to try and implement in ruby
- Replace query error with request error - done
- @deprecated on input fields advanced
- Subscription field not introspection PR reviewed
- Glossary being discussed today
- Non-controversial query ambiguity spec edits merged

## Release plan for next version of GraphQL specification (10m, Lee)

- [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/milestone/2](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/milestone/2)
- Down to just editorial and process changes.
- Over the last month and a half there's been a lot of activity. Lee dove in with a lot of energy on editorial reviews and Benjie saw that energy and helped out.
- Things that haven't made this cut won't have any meaningful impact because implementations should follow the spec draft anyway.
- Ivan: I thought the default value things were blockers, but this milestone makes it clear what the actual blockers are. The only thing we need to merge to be compliant is the unicode PR which is merged in the spec but not merged in GraphQL.js.
- Lee: some of that has been merged already. The only real blocker is updating the legal text in the spec (because the spec cut process is kind of a legal process too). That and the changelog. Everything else is opportunistic.

## graphql-js: Status update on the Typescript migration and temporary feature freeze on unrelated changes (5m, Ivan, Uri)

- Ivan: I was offline for a few weeks for COVID reasons, when I came back I saw a lot of commits and merges by Lee. We're in a good state, we have two main PRs: Sahid's PR and then The Guild's work that's based on that. I didn't want to interrupt the flow of merges before this WG call because I thought we might want to merge some implementations so that they're ready for the spec.
- Ivan: we can't merge everything at once (will be iterative) but we're pretty prepared. There's a few things disabled like strict nullability check that we need to turn back on but we're getting there. Removed a lot of Flow artifacts because we're not just migrating to TypeScript but we're also removing Flow.
- Ivan: if I review and merge PRs it's challenging because of the process. Let's freeze the main branch from today for 1 week, no merges, just complete the TypeScript conversion, I'll ping everyone in PRs and guide/help them updating their PRs once this is done.
- Ivan: is it okay to do this freeze?
- Lee: I think so; I'm happy to rebase my PRs on top of that. It may be a bit of work but I think it's reasonable and I'm looking forward to it.
- Ivan: Thursday - Thursday freeze. Also you can remove all the `.d.ts` changes from your PRs after the merge.
- **ACTION - Ivan**: announce this on the repo and pin the notification.
- Uri: will we be releasing 16.0.0-alpha.1 at that point?
- Ivan: couple asterisks: we'll be converting as much as possible to TypeScript, but some things will be turned off via comments so we'll still need to do some cleanup work. We're probably going to need some breaking changes due to default values and other changes (and we try and minimize breaking changes) but because we're the reference implementation one of the aims is to be readable so it might make sense to release these breaking changes along with the TypeScript migration. We also want to get ESM support but that's a big headache, so we need to work on that too.

## Default Value Coercion RFC (5m, Evan)

- [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/793)
- Ticket and Draft PR of a failed ruby implementation
- Evan: I've spent the last couple of weeks on and off trying to integrate the default value changes into GraphQL Ruby and have had to try a few different approaches; it's resulted in a lot of architectural discussions and some bug reports. I don't want to give the thumbs up yet, but it's looking like it's okay.
- Evan (chat): Two different ruby attempts:[ https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/pull/3448](https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/pull/3448) and[ https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/pull/3476](https://github.com/rmosolgo/graphql-ruby/pull/3476)
- Lee: Andi and I have been working on this in GraphQL .NET and GraphQL.js; I've been struggling with this so it should give you an idea of how complex it is! The root of the reason that this is much harder than the spec edit would make you think is: what kind of value is the default value? In .js we "assume already coerced" which I'm calling an "internal value". There's already sketchy hijinks going on to convert this internal value to a value that can be output through GraphQL Introspection.
- Lee: I'm still working on the graphql.js changes, it's required filling in a number of these boxes that haven't existed before.
- Evan: Ruby provides coercion in and coercion out, and they're meant to be symmetric, so this part wasn't so hard for us. The issue for us has been that the type references aren't resolved until [...], but it's too late because it's already validated by that point.
- Lee: GraphQL.js solves this in two phases: builds an unvalidated schema, and then when it gets validated it sets a property on the schema.
- Evan: I managed to get an infinite loop due to late binding.
- Andi: I've managed to get a Java PR up and running based on what I've discussed with Lee, it touches 72 files in GraphQL Java!
- Evan: in Ruby I'm currently doing it so that the value isn't validated until execution time which is a little gross but at least it works.
- Lee: eventually correct is better than incorrect.
- Benjie (chat): [Sorry for the default value pain everyone!]

## Full unicode support (15m, Lee, Andi)

- [Original RFC Issue](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/687)
- [Spec PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/849)
- [Pending Implementation PR](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/2449)
- Lee: we've been discussing this for a while now, but I think we've cracked it thanks to Andi's input. One piece of complexity I've added is a new kind of complex escape sequence (JS added it a couple years ago, Swift's had it since inception) - it's `\u` followed by an arbitrarily long hex codepoint.
- Lee: I have an implementation PR I'm happy to rebase on the TS conversion. I think it's mostly just a case of ensuring the test cases are correct, but if anyone can pass their eyes over it I'd appreciate it.
- Ivan: I tried to review it, but to really understand what's going on you need Unicode knowledge. Would be great to have someone with Unicode knowledge review it.
- Lee: I had to deep-dive and teach myself a much better understanding of Unicode to do this. There are two subtle things going on that interoperate with each other that relate to UTF16. (JS uses UTF16 independent of what format your source files are.) For complex values it uses surrogate pairs; GraphQL.js then has complex logic to implement these. The spec is careful to forbid invalid surrogate pairs because it could cause a crash. JS is fine with this, but the spec must be more careful.
- Andi: I'm happy we tackled this, it's kind of straightforward - we're not doing anything special here. We're just trying to align with all the other languages/encoding.
- Lee: this is part of the reason it's taken so long - I've been learning Unicode via JS which has made it quite challenging, but as I messed around with other languages it got a lot clearer.

## Glossary RFC (10m, Benjie)

- [ RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/846)
- Benjie: add clarity and precision, especially after the many many meanings of query
- Lee has added glossary support to spec-md (the tooling we use for the spec)
- Expect some PRs over time using this to add some definitions
- Please review/PR to the RFC doc in the meantime, and also now just directly to the spec
- Lee: here’s an example of a spec PR (note the leading ::) that uses this [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/633/files](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/633/files)
- Leaving the definition of the term in context and just link to them from the index, to prevent the need to jump around while reading the spec.
- Still TODO / to discuss: extract all definitions into an appendix, like we do with the full grammar
- Benjie: let’s define the terms first, and once we have content we can revisit extracting it into an appendix

## Query Level Nullability RFC (15m, Alex Reilly, Stephen Spalding)

- [RFC](https://github.com/twof/graphql-spec/pull/1)
- [Strawman](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/867)
- Alex: [presentation]
- Alex: &lt;lots of champions, from Yelp and Netflix>
- Alex: it's a strawman.
- Alex: there's been a lot of feedback from Relay but that's not reflected here.
- Questions: Is it feasible? Prior attempts? How to progress?
- Developers frustrated everything's nullable by default (which is a best practice).
- We're proposing that queries can include a non-null designator (`!`) to indicate that a field should be treated non-nullable and if it returns null it should escalate following the standard GraphQL error bubbling.
- Why? GraphQL code generator tooling can generate types that are more in line with the needs of the feature executing the query. Client developers no longer need to deal with nullable types in cases where they're expecting it not to be null.
- Open questions:
  - [see presentation]. Nulls: server vs client?
  - What if cache hits a null?
  - Syntax: `!`? Directive? Params?
  - How do thin clients handle it?
  - How does it play with mutations? (e.g. getting an error even if the mutation succeeded)
- Lee: I love this proposal. There've been previous discussions but we've never got to RFC before. It's been a feature in Relay for quite some time.
- Lee: I'm in strong support for syntax rather than directive for this. Directives pollute a query, you may end up adding a lot more directive text than field text! `!` is a really natural syntax especially for Kotlin/Swift.
- Lee: it has to happen on the server. The Netflix and Relay implementations are showing that this has value.
- Lee: I think this is half a proposal. I think it should also allow the opposite: giving control over the error flow process. I think the opposite should also be possible - like wrapping it in an error boundary - e.g. using `?` to say a non-nullable field that throws an error should be ignored.
- Jordan: we wanted it to live on the server, but as we thought about it we realised it can't because of fragments: different fragments may have differing nullability concerns.
- Joe: we love the idea of having syntax for this. Want to make it clear this is a huge problem and it needs to be solved, it's one of the biggest pain points we see with GraphQL. We see fragments like modular components in an app; one part of app may need specific data, other part is more resilient to that data being missing. Might need different fields on the same parent. One fragment causing another fragment's data to go missing would be undesirable. So Relay would have to strip the non-null assertions unless it can prove this won't happen.
- Matt: I disagree with the statement that it has to be server side. Is there room in the spec to make syntax that does not have to be supported by the server? Or making it so the syntax can be implemented fully client side.
- Lee: the spec doesn't really make a distinction between client and server. Given an operation text and a schema, produce a result. There'd be a very high bar to introduce the concept of server/client to the spec text - we don't have them currently. Relay _is_ a GraphQL service.
- An explicit goal of the RFC should be that it's translatable on the client, so Relay/any other client can take out all the `!` and use `@required` and implement it on the client side.
- Lee: is this a reasonable goal: rather than stating client/server side, just make sure the spec allows the client to manage this if it wants to.
- Joe: if there's going to be a null somewhere doing this on server side we could skip a whole bunch of processing. Are we going to get the wins we want to if we do it this way?
- Evan: the main issue is that the server is expected to merge identical fields and identical fragments; if the server didn't have to do this then we wouldn't have the issue. A big change could be to let the clients request not to merge the fragments.
- Joe: this was actually something we discussed years ago, in fact I think Lee implemented this at one point.
- Matt: we'd love a world where the response was modularised in a way somehow so that it would be impossible to have clashes from fragments.
- Lee: there's also a risk that resolvers have to be run multiple times if fields aren't merged.
- Alex: who on the Relay group want to be point of contact?
- Joe: me
- Benjie: do we require `!` on both / `?` on both? Could cause issues &lt;expands>
- Joe: Relay has a validation rule that's as strict as possible. We'd strip the `!` out before we validate.
- Lee: Relay GraphQL is not exactly GraphQL: it adds stuff and removes stuff, and validation rules is one such way to do this. So overlapping fields must match could be cast out by Relay.
- Liz: we need a point of contact on Apollo too.
- Hugh: that can be me. ([hugh@apollographql.com](mailto:hugh@apollographql.com) / github: hwillson)
- Mark: we could put extra stuff in `extensions`
- Lee: I don't think we can require post-processing; it should work with `curl`/`wget` without needing more work.
- **ACTION** [Alex Reilly, Liz Jakubowski, Mark Larah, Sanae Rosen, Stephen Spalding, Wei Xue, Young Min Kim] - we'll open up a PR. We've a partial implementation on GraphQL.js
- Lee: between RFC 0 and 1 you've got feedback and the group thinks this is a problem worth solving - you're past this phase. I'd like to see the PRs against the spec and GraphQL.js. My advice is to focus more on code than spec - then you can work through from the corner cases.
- Lee: we'll have Alex be the champion if we need a single point of contact. I'm excited to see this go forward.

## Fragment Arguments RFC (15m, Matt Mahoney)

- [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/865)
- Overview of the problem and Relay's current solution
- When to dig deeper into the solution: propose June WG meeting
- Matt: Relay has been passing arguments to fragments for _years_. The arguments directive doesn't have well defined argument types (because it cannot). Want to add arguments to fragments (a syntax we'll validate away to start with).
- Matt: I plan to have this implemented via a PR to GraphQL.js by next WG meeting, including a validation rule that clients that can turn off that says it's not supported. This will help us to figure out how the behaviour should work assuming we have the syntax.
- Lee: is the proposal here to introduce syntax and to make that syntax invalid: clients can mess with it but servers should reject it.
- Matt: there's validation rules that we are adding so that e.g. variables can only be defined on fragments where the variable is not used. This rule would remove transitive variables from fragments.
- Lee: so a fragment variable is only in scope within that fragment, it doesn't transitively flow.
- Matt: yep. We might open this up in future, but by being limiting now we can change our mind later.
- Benjie: so this can be implemented as a preprocessor pretty much with this rule?
- Matt: yes, but we can't use it in GraphiQL or Prettier because the syntax isn't available.
- Lee: I would not be in favour of a change that adds syntax but makes the syntax invalid. It should provide utility. We need to ensure we define functionality for what this should do in the spec.
- Lee: this introduces a new schema coordinate.
- Joe: during the experimentation phase it would be good to have support behind a flag in the parser in GraphQL.js to allow us to iterate to figure out what the spec changes should be.
- Lee: we've done that before and it mostly works. It doesn't totally solve the problem though - it doesn't necessarily add it to prettier/etc. I'm not opposed to putting things behind a flag and making it clear it's experimental assuming there's a reason to do it.
- Ivan: We support variable definition fragments in GraphQL.js but not passing them through spreads. We had it for years behind a flag. Prettier's not using it (nobody is). I wanted to rename the flag from experimental to legacy. I'm up for going all-in; but for now adding it to syntax but not to execution would work.
- Ivan: Benjie and Matt are right - we could do transform on server side. We do leak the parsed query during execution (via `resolveInfo`) so manipulating the document is currently not a good idea.
- Ivan: I don't want to have a flag for every proposal; if it's non-controversial and simple I'm happy just adding it but removing it in a minor release if need be.
- Lee: if we need to get a version merged with this experiment that's okay, but I'd rather we just did it via a PR for now. Unit tests in a PR should answer many of these questions. It needs execution.

## Advancing \_\_typename not valid at subscription root RFC (15m, Benjie)

- [RFC](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/776)
- Ivan approved [the GraphQL.js changes](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/2861)
- Have since updated the implementation to more closely mirror the spec.
- Potential validation oversight - @skip/@include; see related RFC: [graphql/graphql-spec/pull/860](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/pull/860)
- Question: have other implementors had a chance to look at this yet?
- Lee: this seems like the right direction
- Ivan: validation right now doesn’t know “is this directive valid on this field?” or things like that, this would be a new validation specifically for @skip/@include
- Evan: really we don’t have a directive location for “field on the subscription root”
- **ACTION - Benjie** - raise a separate PR for this against GraphQL.js
