# GraphQL WG Meeting 5/2/2019


*   16:02 — Scott and Seth talking about background advice on whether recording meetings or not is a good idea.
    * WG discussed recording the meeting. No vetoes.

*   16:11 — Decision was reached to record meeting; recording started. Meeting officially starts.
*   16:12-16:21 — Introductions
*   16:21 — Agenda
*   16:23 — note taking arrangement
*
*   16:25- Joint Development Foundation (JDF) Update (Scott):
    *   A lot of interest from organizations to contribute to the specification
    *   Two agreements on Github (future participants: please review and sign)
    *   JDF made a simple way of spinning up projects for specifications; merged with the Linux Foundation
    *   GraphQL is the first project to come from the Linux Foundation to JDF
    *   JDF has experience in making sure the specification works well, etc
    *   JDF not interested in creating a heavy-weight process
    *   Not required to join GraphQL foundation to join these meetings
    *   Lee: making sure you sign the document to make sure you play by the rules
    *   First GraphQL board meeting happened a few weeks ago
    *   GraphQL Foundation owns: GraphQL Spec, GraphQL-js, GraphiQL. Serves as neutral home for projects. Meetings to direct budget.
    *   Good thing that the community can spin up projects outside of the GraphQL foundation umbrella
    *   Move into the GraphQL Foundation when there is a problem to solve (e.g. multiple companies in disagreement over a certain project)
    *   Avoid the GraphQL Foundation being a brand (official vs not official)
    *   One potential use of the GraphQL foundation could be to fund developers for certain projects
    *   Transferring rights to GraphQL foundation still a problem (work is in-flight)
    *   Communication tools is something the foundation should help organize
    *   Question: Does the foundation change the decision making process for the specification? It does, but only to clarify the process futher.
    *   Groups in the foundation: 1. The board (people/companies who've contributed funds), 2. The working group, 3. The technical committee (not yet formed)
        *   Technical committee, shouldn't be doing much, but make decisions or solving problems that can't be solved other ways
        *   Vote on new versions of cutting new releases for the specification
    *   Question: Does the foundation organize conferences? Conferences isn't a problem with GraphQL, we have three major ones.
        *   Foundation can help with some problems, like consistent branding
        *   Seth: a lot of ecosystem marketing you can do within the Linux Foundation (e.g. communicating to CNCF)
        *   What works for CNCF may not work for GraphQL, but we can learn from them
*   16:50 - Demo of TCQ (Steve):
    *   Written by the co-chair of TC39
    *   Keeps track of agenda items
    *   Has a speaker queue to track what people are asking
    *   In addition to zoom software (or other video conferencing)
    *   Investigate testing this out in the next meeting
    *   Used internally at microsoft
    *   Lee: concerned it “adds considerable process on top of what we’re used to”
    *   Lee: for the rest of this meeting, let’s use the zoom group chat more
*   17:00 - OffsetDateTime Scala (Andi):
    *   [https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/579](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/issues/579)
    *   Most requested scalar from Java community
    *   Complex enough to provide real value
    *   Different implementations are inconsistent
    *   Not full ISO-8601 implementation
    *   Name chosen to be very specific and not conflict with Date/DateTime scalars that people might have implemented
    *   Good use cases: events in the past, events in the future where time zone is not relevant
    *   Question: How does it relate to internet RFC for DateTime (3339?)? It is a subset of ISO-8601, OffsetDateTime scalar is even more specific (e.g. you can't just specify the year, you have to rely on convention and include year/month
    *   Tradeoff between being really specific and GraphQL specification complexity
    *   What we need is how this differs from existing ones and why and anything we lose with just using RFC3339.
    *   Go: gives you a generic type of time and you can pass in a format that allows you to specify the representation, maybe by introducing a directive to allow you to pass in the format
    *   Not having Date in the spec doesn't mean you can't represent Date
    *   We can have a set of best practices that you should implement or a child spec that we can refer people to implement if they need it
    *   Question: How have people in the Java community worked around not having this scalar? Java didn't include any DateTime objects, recently Andi has released an appendix library that includes DateTime objects you can use; interoperability is limited (e.g. inputs from Javascript). People probably used the standard Java DateTime functionality
    *   Putting into spec is difficult because there are so many approaches to dates and times, custom scalars is a good solution
    *   Proposal: have a standard registry of types with "ugly prefixes" (e.g. STD_ISOXYZ_DateTimeOffset)
    *   Worth having a conversation to bike shed on the names themselves
    *   Should we talk about having other tools to help with working with scalars?
    *   Why OffsetDateTime instead of DateTime? Avoid name collision with existing scalar, OffsetDateTime is more specific and DateTime is not clear about what it encapsulates
    *   Lee: want to avoid prefixes for core scalars and not make them hard to use
    *   Lee: do we want a more general way to handle custom scalars? Seems to be the biggest pain point for integration & tooling
    *   Ivan: what if the scalar is not convertible to a basic type in the target language? Will need an extra package. Ex: would be bad to ask JS devs to import MomentJS to use GraphQL’s custom time scalar.
    *   Question: Why was there a need to add the ID scalar? The ID scalar is more an accident in history, it still adds value. Capture IDs, where at Facebook where they are numeric looking strings and preventing them being cast as an integer.
    *   Lee: not against adding common, well-known types as scalars
    *   If you had a scalar with the same name and we introduce OffsetDateTime you aren't using GraphQL which is significant
    *   Reasonable for graphql-java to add a custom scalar to represent OffsetDateTime
    *   Idea: could we have the client map a custom scalar to what they want to do with the value (Java client could parse it into a DateTime object, etc)
        *   What do we need to do that? Could be purely client-side tooling
    *   Take-aways: 1. Crisper articulation of how it's different than RFC3339, 2. Challenge the name, specified scalar should be a terse name; community audit to understand how people are using DateTime in their existing schemas and they already are using RFC3339 or something close to it, 3. Improving situation around scalars, encourage the community in making them dramatically more useful
*   17:41 - Future of GraphiQL (Orta)
    *   Orta not in attendance
    *   Question: How can one get more involved in helping the project advance? Lee: there is no maintainer anymore because it moved from Facebook to the foundation. Immediate next step is a call for maintainers for GraphiQL
    *   Simplify end-to-end experience in adding features to GraphiQL
        *   Rikki's dependency [diagram](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/pull/1196#issuecomment-480275925) of adding a new feature to GraphiQL
    *   GraphiQL solves two problems: 1. Full product you can use, 2. Toolbox of utilities you can take apart and put together
    *   Intent for creating other repos was to further abstract out the language services (e.g. type ahead, highlighting), next step could be to merge those repos into a monorepo
    *   Rikki experimented with it but there will be two type systems living side-by-side in the same monorepo
    *   Next steps: More people to have commit rights. Have a plan on the future work.
    *   Discuss creating a working group for GraphiQL
*   18:00 - Input Union RFCs (Tim/Rikki):
    *   Agreement it's a pain point not having an input union
    *   Main blocker: specifying "__inputname" is a breaking change
    *   Secondary blocker: Whether “__inputname” is the best implementation for this, is there a better approach to disambiguating between union members
    *   Demo in GraphiQL of reference implementation
    *   Default keyword solves the big problem on the ability to migrate
    *   Question: Can you set a variable name to an input union type? It doesn't currently work in the reference implementation but should.
    *   Question: Why "__inputname" vs "__typename"? "inputname" seemed more clean and correlates to input type. You would need to transform the type name to use it (e.g. "Post" to "PostInput").
    *   They are subtly different and calling two different concepts by the same name is confusing
    *   Lee: needs convinced they are two different things, seem like the same thing, both return a type name
    *   Question: Can you infer the input type from the fields without relying on the "__inputname" field? Need to think about how to do that without introducing a substantial performance hit. Typing it when you define the variable could achieve the same result without as many changes to the implementation
    *   Lee: it does not feel easy to use and the first time a user goes to use this they are going to get it wrong. Feels like a pretty strong downside to this proposal. Like to start from the very best developer experience and articulate the trade-offs. Not convinced that it is expensive to figure out which input types match. Having a differentiator ("__inputname") is a great optional add-in.
    *   Lee: default is a good solution for the migration story
    *   Compelling use cases for input unions: filter queries that let you sort, condition, etc
    *   Question: Do you have any advice on getting decisions made? It's clear from the discussions here the issue remains the discriminator and people feeling like we don't need it. Awesome to see code for this proposal.
    *   Proposal: create an RFC document and check it in (like [subscriptions](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-spec/blob/master/rfcs/Subscriptions.md))
    *   Default keyword vs explicit ordering: using explicit ordering it would be the only part in the spec where ordering mattered
    *   Order is important with directives in final stage of RFC and likely getting merged in
*   18:52 - Two stage introspection (Ivan):
    *   Presentation by Ivan to start discussion
        *   https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ISS5QhF6D2ncD8ZGChoCv1LnOWj9jryZrJ2dG11i4Mc/edit?usp=sharing 
    *   4 out of 7 PRs require introspective changes
    *   Do the stock introspection query first and fallback to one without subscriptions for servers that do not support it
    *   First introspection stage query retrieves all fields for all introspection types
    *   Stage 2 build introspection query based on the types returned in stage 1
    *

